
<section> To cite: Pant S, Elias MA,
 
<section> Woolfall K, et al. Parental
 and professional perceptions
 
<section> of informed consent and
 participation in a time-­critical
 neonatal trial: a mixed-­methods
 study in India, Sri Lanka and
 Bangladesh. BMJ Global Health
 2021;6:e005757. doi:10.1136/
 
<section> bmjgh-2021-005757
 
<section> Handling editor Seye Abimbola
 
<section> ► Additional supplemental
 material is published online only.
 To view, please visit the journal
 online (http://​dx. d oi.​org/​10.​
 1136/ b mjgh-​2021- 05757).
 
<section> Received 18 March 2021
 
<section> Revised 21 April 2021
 
<section> Accepted 24 April 2021
 
<section> © Author(s) (or their
 employer(s)) 2021. Re-­use
 permitted under CC BY.
 Published by BMJ.
 For numbered affiliations see
 end of article.
 
<section> Correspondence to
 
<section> Ms Stuti Pant;
 
<section> ​s.​pant@ i 
<section> mperial.​ac.​uk
 
<section> Parental and professional
 
<section> informed consent and
 
<section> time-­critical neonatal
 
<section> methods study in India,
 
<section> and Bangladesh
 
<section> Stuti Pant , 1 Maya Annie Elias , 2 Kerry
 Bensitta Lincy, 4 Ismat Jahan, 5 Samanmali P
 Seetha Shankaran, 8 Sudhin Thayyil, 1 HELIX
 
<section> ABSTRACT
 
<section> Introduction Time-­critical neonatal trials in low-­and-­
 middle-­income countries (LMICs) raise several ethical
 issues. Using a qualitative-­dominant mixed-­methods
 design, we explored informed consent process in
 Hypothermia for encephalopathy in low and middle-­income
 countries (HELIX) trial conducted in India, Sri Lanka and
 Bangladesh.
 
<section> Methods Term infants with neonatal encephalopathy,
 aged less than 6 hours, were randomly allocated to cooling
 therapy or usual care, following informed parental consent.
 The consenting process was audio-­video (A-­V) recorded in
 all cases. We analysed A-­V records of the consent process
 using a 5-­point Likert scale on three parameters—
 empathy, information and autonomy. In addition, we
 used exploratory observation method to capture relevant
 aspects of consent process and discussions between
 parents and professionals. Finally, we conducted in-­
 depth interviews with a subgroup of 20 parents and
 15 healthcare professionals. A thematic analysis was
 performed on the observations of A-­V records and on the
 interview transcripts.
 
<section> Results A total of 294 A-­V records of the HELIX trial were
 analysed. Median (IQR) score for empathy, information and
 autonomy was 5 (0), 5 (1) and 5 (1), respectively. However,
 thematic analysis suggested that the consenting was a
 ceremonial process; and parental decision to participate
 was based on unreserved trust in the treating doctors,
 therapeutic misconception and access to an expensive
 treatment free of cost. Most parents did not understand the
 concept of a clinical trial nor the nature of the intervention.
 Professionals showed a strong bias towards cooling
 therapy and reported time constraints and explaining to
 multiple family members as key challenges.
 
<section> Conclusion Despite rigorous research governance
 and consent process, parental decisions were heavily
 influenced by situational incapacity and a trust in doctors
 to make the right decision on their behalf. Further research
 is required to identify culturally and context-­appropriate
 strategies for informed trial participation.
 
<section> perceptions of
 
<section> participation in a
 
<section> trial: a mixed-­
 
<section> Sri Lanka
 
<section> Woolfall, 3 Maria Moreno Morales,
 Sumanasena, 6 Siddarth Ramji,
 Trial consortium investigators
 
<section> Key questions
 
<section> What is already known?
 
<section> ► Informed parental consent for time-­critical trials in
 neonatal intensive care units is challenging in high-­
 income countries.
 
<section> ► Parental consent rates for neonatal intervention
 trials in low-­and-­middle-­income countries are sub-
 stantially higher than in high-­income countries.
 
<section> What are the new findings?
 
<section> ► Despite a rigorous informed consenting process, pa-
 rental consenting was heavily influenced by an un-
 reserved trust in the treating doctors and therapeutic
 misconception.
 
<section> ► Clinicians showed a clear bias favouring the inter-
 vention (cooling therapy), which was reflected in
 their communications with the parents.
 
<section> What do the new findings imply?
 
<section> ► Ethical boards and research teams need to be
 cognisant of the possibility of systematic bias and
 therapeutic misconception in emulating successful
 models of treatments from high-­income countries to
 low-­and-­middle-­income countries.
 
<section> ► Culturally appropriate and innovative approaches to
 trial recruitment and consent seeking are needed
 for time-­critical trials conducted in low-­and-­middle-­
 income countries.
 
<section> INTRODUCTION
 Informed parental consent for time-­ critical
 trials in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs)
 is challenging, as parents are likely to be under
 extreme emotional distress due to the critical
 clinical condition of their newborn infant. 1 In
 such situations, the clinical or research staff
 who approach parents for trial participation
 require specific training, skills and empathy
 to assist parents in making an informed and 
<section> voluntary decision about their baby’s participation in a
 trial. The depth and level of information provided in
 the consenting process is expected to be proportionate
 to the potential for harm and the vulnerability of the
 trial population; for example, interventional trials may
 require more discussion than observational studies.
 Parental consent processes for time-­ critical trials in
 low-­and-­middle-­income countries (LMICs) involving
 populations from lower socioeconomic backgrounds are
 even more complex due to low literacy levels, parental
 disempowerment, hierarchies that exist in healthcare
 setting and larger societal factors. 3 4 Furthermore, the
 research governance and ethical frameworks in LMICs
 are less rigorous and may not adequately protect the trial
 participants. 5 Expensive interventions that are not easily
 available outside a LMIC trial setting may misguide partic-
 ipants by therapeutic misconception and false hopes. 6–8 A
 recent systematic review comparing consent rates for
 randomly selected recent neonatal interventional trial
 demonstrated significantly higher parental consent rates
 in LMICs (95.5%) when compared with high-­ income
 countries (HICs) (82.7%), raising concerns about the
 credibility of the consent processes in LMICs.
 We conducted a mixed-­methods nested study within
 the ‘Hypothermia for encephalopathy in low and middle-­
 income countries (HELIX) trial’ to assess the rigour of
 the informed consent process and understand the factors
 influencing parental decision-­making to participate in
 the trial.
 
<section> METHODS
 
<section> The HELIX trial (​ ClinicalTrials.​ gov, NCT02387385),
 to which this mixed-­methods study was linked, was an
 open-­ label, multi-­ country randomised controlled trial
 conducted in seven large public sector tertiary NICUs in
 India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh. The trial was approved
 by the research ethics committees at Imperial College
 London and participating sites.
 Prior to the trial launch, all the local clinical staff
 completed the International Conference on Harmonisa-
 tionGood Clinical Practice certification and underwent
 rigorous training simulations on research ethics and
 informed consenting for the trial. There was specific
 emphasis during the training not to coerce parents into
 consenting for the trial by way of inducements such as
 financial benefits or specific investigations the baby may
 receive as a part of trial participation.
 Between August 2015 and February 2019, parents of
 475 term infants requiring an emergency admission to
 the NICU within 6 hours of birth due to neonatal enceph-
 alopathy were approached for trial participation. 10 One
 of the neonatal physicians explained the trial procedures
 to the parents, shared a participant information leaflet
 (PIL) in the local language and then obtained written
 informed consent. Briefly, this included explaining the
 reason for conducting the trial, potential benefits and
 adverse effects of the intervention (cooling therapy),
 randomisation process, study investigations and the right
 to decline trial participation without affecting the baby’s
 clinical care in any way. Cooling therapy was adminis-
 tered using an approved servo-­controlled cooling device
 (Tecotherm Neo) costing UIS$15 000, if the infant was
 randomised to the intervention group. All trial proce-
 dures were offered free of cost to all participants.
 Audio-­visual (A-­V) recording of the consenting process
 was obtained in all cases to monitor that clinicians had
 provided all key information to parents, answered any
 questions they had and to ensure that parents were not
 coerced into consenting to the trial.
 
<section> Study design and participants
 We used a qualitative dominant mixed-­methods design. A
 quantitative assessment of the A-­V recordings of HELIX
 trial’s consent process was undertaken by two investiga-
 tors (SP and MAE) who were not involved in the orig-
 inal consenting process. A total of 294 A-­V records of
 the HELIX trial which satisfied the quality parameters
 were analysed. Alongside, we used an exploratory obser-
 vation method for capturing relevant aspects of consent
 process. Key observations and conversations between
 parents and professionals were noted down by SP and
 MAE independently.
 A subgroup of the 20 consecutive parents who had
 their child’s neurodevelopmental outcome assessments
 between August and September 2020 were invited to
 participate in a semi-­structured in-­depth interview, close
 to their clinical assessments at 18 months. Participants
 were recruited through purposive sampling; location
 (study sites) was considered to obtain diversity in narra-
 tives and experience. Parents from Bangladesh could
 not be interviewed due to language barrier and logis-
 tical issues. We interviewed medical and nursing teams
 (n=15) who were involved in the recruitment at all trial
 sites (figure 1).
 Parental interviews explored their experiences prior
 to and after the birth of their baby, their decision of
 trial participation, understanding of the trial proce-
 dures and their overall experience of participation.
 Professional’s interviews were focused on the informed
 consent process, challenges faced during the process and
 their overall experience of recruiting to a time-­critical
 neonatal randomised controlled trial. A total of 10 inter-
 views were conducted face to face and 24 over telephone.
 The sample size was determined by data saturation, that
 is, at the point at which no new information or theme was
 observed in the data. 11 The interviews were conducted
 by a female qualitative researcher (MAE). All interviews
 were audio recorded, translated and transcribed verbatim
 for analysis. NVivo V.12 software was used to organise and
 manage interview data.
 
<section> Data analysis
 
<section> The A-­ V recordings of the original consent process
 were scored using a predefined proforma with 18 ques-
 tions under 3 domains: (a) empathy 12 (ie, respectful 
<section> Figure 1 HELIX trial consent flow chart.
 
<section> communication in local language and avoidance of
 medical jargon), (b) information (ie, explanation of all
 study procedures and risk benefits) and (c) autonomy
 (refer online supplemental file - annexure 1). Each
 question was scored using a 5-­point Likert scale from
 (lowest) to 5 (highest); median and IQR were calculated.
 Interviews were analysed thematically, which involved
 reading the transcripts several times to identify, analyse
 and report the themes within and across the data. 14
 Analysis was broadly interpretive, and themes were induc-
 tively derived from the data. Constant comparative
 method was used to generate validity of data with an
 objective to inform ethical governance and guidelines in
 LMIC trials. 16 SP and MAE conducted line-­by-­line coding
 of transcript and developed initial codes. Observation
 notes were also analysed thematically, which helped SP
 and MAE to reflect on interview findings and further
 refine the coding framework (refer online supplemental
 file - annexure 2). Finally, visual thematic maps were
 developed to conceptualise themes and find common-
 alities and the interdependence within these themes
 through an iterative process of concurrent reflection and
 discussion.
 
<section> Ethical considerations
 Ethics approval for HELIX trial and the mixed-­methods
 study was obtained from Imperial College Research
 Ethics Committee. The approvals included A-­V recording
 of the consent process, review of A-­V records as well as
 in-­depth interviews with parents and professionals. The
 study objectives and voluntary nature of the study were
 explained to the participants and informed consent was
 obtained prior to the interviews.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement statement
 Parent representatives from LMICs advised designing of
 HELIX trial as well as the PIL, although they were not
 directly involved in the design of the current study.
 
<section> RESULTS
 
<section> A total of 475 parents were approached, and 408 (86%)
 agreed to participate in the HELIX trial. Of these,
 123 (30%) infants were born in the trial centres while
 285 (70%) were either born in another facility or had
 home birth. The mean (SD) time from admission to the
 neonatal unit to consenting was 113 (97) min. Following 
<insert> Figure 2 Distribution of the Likert scores under the three
 domains. Red dots indicate consent obtained during normal
 working hours (8:00 to 18:00) and black dots indicate
 consents obtained out of hours (18:00 to 20:00).
 illustrate, in some cases, clinicians highlighted access
 to free treatment through trial participation or made
 unsupported assurances about safety of cooling in this
 LMIC setting.
 “It is your luck that you are here, outside for this treatment,
 you have to spend a lot of money. Here it is given free of
 cost”—Research nurse (Video analysis_355)
 “Cooling will not cause any side effects, it is a proven
 treatment, and you need not worry about it”—Clinician
 (Video analysis_29)
 Disempowerment and trust in doctors to do ‘what was best’
 Many parents seemed visibly distressed during recorded
 discussions and there were instances where fathers broke
 down during the consent process. In many record-
 ings, parents told the doctor that they lacked sufficient
 knowledge to decide about trial participation and made
 requests for the doctor to do whatever they felt was best
 for their baby.
 “We don’t know much, you know everything cos you are
 qualified, please see the baby and do whatever is necessary,
 they [referring centre] sent us here saying it will be good
 for the baby” (Video analysis_5)
 “If you say so, it is fine, I will sign the paper. You know
 better as you are a doctor. We don’t even know A,B,C,D of
 this; we completely trust you and rest is up to God” (Video
 analysis_19) 
<iend>

 parental consent, 202 infants were randomised to cooling
 and 206 to usual care.
 
<section> Analysis of A-V consent recordings
 Semi-quantitative assessments
 For HELIX trial, a total of 408 A-­V records of parental
 consents were obtained in seven different South Asian
 regional languages. Neonatal consultants or the site prin-
 cipal investigator obtained the consent in 12% cases,
 and junior doctors in 88% cases, although this varied by
 the centre. Among these consent taking professionals,
 53% were male and 47% were female. In most cases
 (89.3%), fathers were involved in consenting, followed
 by mothers (4.6%), both parents (3.1%) and relatives
 (3.1%). Mothers, when present, were passive observers,
 while fathers or other male family members present (in
 absence of the father) were seen engaging in discussions
 with the clinicians and making decision regarding child’s
 enrolment to the trial.
 Due to issues such as loss of data and poor quality of
 audio, we were able to analyse a total of 294 A-­V recordings
 from six centres. Mean (SD) duration of A-­V recordings
 was 10.3 (7.2) min. Parents were briefed about key study
 information including randomisation, cooling therapy
 and risk–benefits in all cases. The information that was
 not discussed during the consent process included data
 confidentiality (12%), regulatory approvals (10%), addi-
 tional blood tests and umbilical cord histology (9%),
 and the freedom to withdraw from the study at any time
 without the clinical care being affected (6%).
 Semi-­quantitative analysis based on the 17 predefined
 categories showed median (IQR) score for empathy,
 information and autonomy of 5 (0), 5 (1) and 5 (1),
 respectively, indicating an excellent informed consenting
 process. The consent quality scores of day-­time and night-­
 time recruits, and those obtained by the consultants and
 junior doctors were similar (p>0.05) (figure 2).
 
<section> Thematic analysis of the A-V recording
 The following themes were identified on careful obser-
 vation of the A-­V recordings of the consenting process.
 
<section> A ceremonial process
 In most cases across study sites, the clinicians read out
 the PILs and parents rarely sought clarifications or asked
 questions. In most of the video records, clinicians were
 observed using phrases such as ‘as I explained earlier’ and
 ‘as discussed with you’, which indicated that the videos did
 not necessarily represent the first trial discussion with a
 family. The whole process appeared ceremonial; a task
 that needed to be fulfilled as per the trial protocol. Thus,
 the A-­V recordings appeared to be a re-­affirmation of the
 earlier discussion between the clinicians and the family.
 
<section> Clinician’s bias towards the intervention (cooling therapy)
 Instances were observed where clinicians and research
 nurses were not in equipoise and referred to the trial
 treatment as something beneficial, which could help
 improve their baby’s outcome. As the following quotations
 
<section> Analysis of the interviews with parents
 A total of 20 parents were approached for the interviews
 and all of them consented to participate. Of these inter-
 views, only fathers participated in 14, both parents in 
<insert> Participant
 characteristics Classification
 Number of
 parents (n=20)
 Age (in years)
  
 20–30
 31–40
   41–50
 Education Primary/secondary
 school
   High school
   Higher-­secondary
   Undergraduate
 Occupation* Unemployed
   Skilled worker
   Semi-­skilled worker
   Professional
   Self-­employed
 Monthly income
 (INR and USD)
 <10 000 (<US$140)
   <20 000 (<US$285)
  
  
 <30 000 (<US$420)
 >30 000 (>US$420)
 Semi-­skilled workers included office helper, security personnel etc.
 *Skilled workers included carpenters, drivers, mechanics,
 electricians, tailors etc.
 Table 1 Profile of parents interviewed 
<iend>

 five and only mother in one. Parent profile is presented
 in table 1. Key themes developed from interviews with
 parents are given in the next section.
 
<section> Limited understanding about the concept of a clinical
 trial and intervention: “Baby was kept on a machine”
 Despite AV recordings confirming that adequate infor-
 mation was provided to parents, interview findings indi-
 cated that most parents did not understand that they were
 participating in a clinical trial; parents felt that it as an
 additional treatment, for which they had to give consent.
 Many of them explained the trial as ‘treatment was done
 using a machine’ and that the treatment was provided by a
 ‘team from London’.
 
<section> “The doctor told there is a chance for the baby to have
 some issues with the development, and his brain is weak,
 he needs to be put on the machine and his report will be
 sent to London and do you agree to do this. So I said yes
 and we agreed”—P4(3).
 
<section> “When I came there they told that the baby is in a critical
 condition, there is a machine, they will keep the baby in
 the machine and computer will decide if the baby can be
 given this treatment or not”—P4(2).
 
<section> Making decisions under pressure: “We just wanted our
 
<section> baby to survive”:
 While reflecting on the decision to enrol their baby in
 the trial, most parents said that they were anxious and
 under tremendous pressure to decide about trial partic-
 ipation due to their baby’s critical condition. Many felt
 incapacitated by the situation, as they did not have any
 other option, but ultimately hoped that their child would
 survive.
 
<section> “We were in great tension [stress], we were scared… we
 were thinking if this treatment will work or not, we were
 really worried, but what to do, we didn’t have any other
 option. We just wanted the best treatment to be done”—
 P2(3).
 
<section> “That time we did not think much about the treatment we
 were only worried about the critical condition of our baby,
 and that she should get better. We did not think about any-
 thing else at that time”—P3(1)
 
<section> Some accounts indicated that the unfamiliar hospital
 environment increased levels of fear and incapacity to
 make an informed decision. One father struggled to
 recall any details about the research, apart from how
 doctors reassured them that their child would survive if
 they took part in the trial.
 
<section> “I don’t have any idea, I don’t know why they kept him. We
 were very scared we are from village and we don’t know
 anything about the hospital. I had gone for the first time
 and they kept saying that we have to do this for the baby
 and the baby will be alright and then we just told yes. We
 were really scared but still we told him to go ahead because
 our baby has to become alright”—P1(3)
 
<section> Cost concerns: “We did not have the money to go to
 
<section> private hospitals”:
 Treatment cost was another important factor which
 influenced parental decision-­ making. A few parents
 shared that they decided to participate in the trial once
 they learnt that the treatment and hospital care was
 offered free of cost.
 
<section> “I said okay for everything… our friends told in [name]
 hospital and other private hospitals it [cooling therapy]
 will be about INR 4,00,000; in [name] hospital, it will be
 more than INR 10,00,000, but luckily the bed was available
 
<section> here”—P8(1)
 
<section> “I didn’t have much money to go to the private, and when
 poor people like us go to the government hospital, we just
 trust God and then trust doctor. We are not rich, we are
 poor, so we told go ahead, we agree to what you are sug-
 
<section> gesting”—P3(3)
 
<section> Trust in treating doctors: “The doctors will do what is
 
<section> good”
 
<section> Parents had unreserved trust in doctors to do whatever
 was necessary to save their child’s life. Many appeared
 to believe the recruiting doctors were in a better posi-
 tion to decide about their own child’s trial participation.
 Parents described how they encouraged the doctor to do
 what they thought was appropriate by ‘letting the doctor
 get on with it’ without fully understanding what the trial
 entailed. Although PIL and most of the communication
 were in the local language, use of certain medical termi-
 nologies in English further limited their understanding
 of what the trial involved. 
<insert> Table 2 Profile of professionals interviewed
 Participant
 characteristics
 Gender
 Classification
 Number of
 respondents
 (n=15)
 Male
 Female
 Role in HELIX trial Principal or co-­
 investigator*
 Total years of
 experience
 Neonatal senior trainees
 (DM students)†
 Neonatal junior trainees
 (MD students)†
 Research nurses
 5–10 years
 11–15 years
 16–20 years
 *Consultant staff.
 †Junior doctors. 
<iend>

 
<section> “I told the doctor to save my baby, whatever you feel ap-
 propriate you please do it. You are telling many things
 in English about medical things and I don’t understand
 those, but whatever you want to do, please go ahead with
 
<section> it”—P4(2)
 
<section> “When the doctor says something, we will trust it 99%. We
 just assume that they are doing a good job and we let them
 
<section> do it”—P8(1)
 
<section> Parents’ belief in positive treatment outcomes:
 “Because we did this, baby is okay”
 Although the whole trial recruitment process was
 described to be quite stressful and confusing, most
 parents believed that their babies had a better outcome
 due to the machine treatment, and referred to their
 babies being ‘alright’, irrespective of adverse neurodevel-
 opmental outcomes.
 
<section> “I believed the doctor’s advice and now the baby is alright.
 At that time the advice given by the doctor satisfied me”—
 P3(2) (the child has cerebral palsy)
 
<section> “Definitely the treatment has benefitted the baby. It was
 good, this treatment has to be given to more people”—
 P8(1) (the child has delayed speech development)
 
<section> Analysis of interviews with professionals
 A total of 15 professionals were contacted and all of them
 consented to participate in the study. Of these, nine were
 neonatal trainees, two were consultants, and four were
 research nurses (RN) who assisted the recruitment and
 consent process (table 2). Key themes developed from
 interviews with professionals are shared in the next
 section.
 
<section> Hesitation to use the term ‘trial’
 Clinicians shared that they were comfortable in explaining
 or proposing the treatment and trial participation to
 parents as the treatment is a standard of care in most
 Western countries. Some expressed that they used the
 word ‘study’ and not ‘trial’ as they worried parents may
 consider this as an ‘experimentation on babies’ and may not
 agree to participate.
 
<section> “We were really worried about what would be the response
 initially… we didn’t want to sound like they are some ex-
 perimental guinea pigs; we were saying that it is a standard
 of care [in the UK], it is a study and it is well researched
 all over the world and we want to bring it to our country. I
 think the way you word it is very important, if you just tell
 them that it is part of a trial or a study then they may be
 
<section> worried”—Clinician 1(4)
 
<section> Limited parental understanding about randomisation
 Clinicians described how most parents were from low
 socioeconomic backgrounds and had minimal levels of
 education. They believed it was often difficult for parents
 to comprehend their baby’s condition, as well as invi-
 tations to participate in the trial and details of the trial
 procedures. The concept of randomisation was described
 as being particularly difficult for parents to understand,
 with many parents insisting that their baby should receive
 cooling therapy, despite their babies being randomised
 to the control arm.
 
<section> “Those who are a little more educated they probably un-
 derstand what is happening better than who are living on
 the streets and less educated or doing some menial labour.
 Such parents could not understand, it was difficult for
 them to understand what was happening”—Clinician 1(3)
 “Some parents would ask when the randomisation comes
 in the non-­cooling arm, if there a possibility to do the cool-
 ing—such type of questions a few parents would ask. We
 will explain to them that whichever arm the randomisation
 comes to, we will be forced to do that and we will not be
 able to change it according to their wish”—Clinician 2(2)
 Requests were perhaps unsurprising. The following quotes,
 as well as parent interview findings, suggest that parents’
 requests to be allocated to the intervention arm appear to
 have been influenced by clinicians presenting the hypo-
 thermia treatment as proven to be beneficial for their baby.
 
<section> “I think the main challenge was to explain to them about
 the concept of randomisation. That is the one thing they
 did not understand, ‘You told me that hypothermia is very
 beneficial and suppose by randomisation my baby doesn’t
 get it, then I am having a loss’, they would say”—Clinician
 
<section> 2(3)
 
<section> “I wasn’t uncomfortable [taking consent] because it was
 not an experimental study or anything it is already a proven
 treatment. In western countries and many of the hospitals
 are doing it already. If you go to corporate hospitals, they
 
<section> will do it”—Clinician 1(1)
 
<section> Time pressure due to the narrow window period of
 
<section> recruitment
 
<section> Within the limited therapeutic window of cooling
 therapy, clinicians often had less than an hour to counsel 
<section> the parents about their baby’s condition, explain the trial
 and seek their consent. The pressure was multi-­fold in
 cases where parents were not available to consent at the
 time of admission, as in case of outborn infants.
 “Sometimes they would reach at 4 to 5 hours and then you
 have only one hour left within the time window. We have
 had one or two instances where we have started the process
 in just 10 minutes before the time period, time frame…
 So that was a challenge when they come from the far-­off
 
<section> places”—Clinician1(4)
 
<section> Many shared the view that such a short time was not
 enough for the parents to understand everything about
 the trial, especially considering their emotional distress.
 “What I felt was most parents were in an emotional state to
 understand… asphyxia is an unexpected event. When they
 are referred from another hospital, it takes some time for
 this to sink in. We tell them that it is the study going on but
 sometimes it takes time for them to understand what really
 is happening”—Clinician1(4)
 
<section> A few clinicians shared that owing to the parents’
 requests, they often had to explain the trial information
 to multiple family members, and relatives, which further
 magnified time constraints.
 
<section> “We have to explain individually like to 10 people, the
 same process again and again”—Clinician2(3)
 
<section> Misinformation given by referring centres
 Clinicians reported how the complexities of explaining
 the trial to parents grew multi-­ fold when they were
 referred from peripheral centres with inaccurate expla-
 nations and expectations about the trial.
 
<section> “They [the referring centre] wouldn’t have told them that
 there is 50% chance of either cooling or standard care.
 They would have just told that this is a new treatment and
 it is available in [hospital name]… please go, if you keep
 the baby here we are not sure what is going to happen.
 So many times they have come with that hope without any
 background knowledge”—Clinician 2(1)
 
<section> “But one bad impact was there, some people just told that
 this is the new machine and you report over there, the baby
 will be cooled down”—Clinician2(5)
 
<section> Parental anxiety about A-V recording
 While clinicians described the video recording as a
 good practice for standardising the informed consent
 process, it was a challenge logistically and often parents
 were apprehensive. Parents perceived that the treatment
 may not be safe and their consent to participation was
 recorded due to the risky nature of the trial. Due to this
 misguided belief, consent process was multi-­layered and
 more time consuming, whereby clinicians would first
 inform parents about the trial, as well as video consent,
 clarify their queries and then be able to conduct the
 consent process again for the purpose of the video.
 “Sometimes when we start video recording, they used to
 think—they are recording, and something is happening…
 they used to ask why you have to take a video like that. So,
 we used to explain to them that the video consenting is the
 ultimate form of consent”—Clinician 1(1)
 
<section> “Something like this which is time critical and in a very
 emotionally charged situation… you’re trying to get the
 consent, in our set up, we can’t walk into the labour room
 with a video camera and then start the process. We have to
 formally say that we are going to do it with a written consent
 and then we do a video consent later on”—Clinician1(6)
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 
<section> In this study, we describe the unique complexities and
 challenges of informed consenting and the parental
 and professional perspectives of research participation
 in LMICs. Proforma-­based quantitative analysis of A-­V
 recordings suggested an elaborate consent process,
 where parents were provided adequate information prior
 to recruitment, including randomisation, potential risks–
 benefits and parental autonomy in decision to participate
 in the trial. On the contrary, observational analysis from
 A-­V recordings clearly revealed clinician’s bias towards
 cooling therapy, and emotional distress and disempow-
 erment of parents.
 Parental interview findings were consistent with these
 observations. Decision to participate was primarily based
 on the trust in the treating doctors, and therapeutic
 misconception, and the opportunity to have an expen-
 sive treatment free of cost. Most parents did not under-
 stand the concept of a clinical trial nor the nature of the
 intervention. Lower levels of parental education and
 misinformation provided by the referring centres further
 convoluted the voluntary informed consent process.
 Interviews with professionals reiterated the strong bias
 towards cooling therapy, as this was already a standard of
 care in HICs and many LMIC hospitals in private sector.
 Time constraints and explaining to multiple family
 members were reported as the key challenges faced by
 professionals. In a situation of extreme distress, a posi-
 tive validation of cooling therapy from professionals was
 a ‘ray of hope’ for parents. Therefore, parental decisions
 were not entirely autonomous and were influenced due
 to situational incapacity and a trust in doctors to make
 ‘the right decision on their behalf’.
 Cooling therapy is recommended by the International
 Liaison Committee Resuscitation guidelines in 2015 as
 the standard of care in LMICs for neonatal encephalop-
 athy. 17 Although the guidelines acknowledged the poor-­
 quality evidence regarding safety of cooling therapy in
 LMICs, it was already implemented in many NICUs in
 India 18 and other South Asian countries 19 as standard
 care, at the time of the HELIX trial recruitment. Hence,
 the bias of the clinicians towards cooling therapy during
 consenting is understandable. At the time of undertaking
 the qualitative study, HELIX trial was still ongoing, and
 hence clinicians were not aware of the trial outcomes.
 The trial has now been concluded and, contrary to the
 clinicians’ views, the results showed cooling therapy 
<section> significantly increased mortality and offered no neuro-
 protection to infants in these settings. 20 While these
 results were rather unexpected, it underlines the primary
 purpose of conducting any clinical trial—that is, to find
 out if a new treatment is beneficial or not. HELIX trial has
 reiterated the danger of directly extrapolating the results
 of research from high-­income to low-­income settings.
 In HICs, research without prior consent has recently
 emerged as the preferred approach in time-­critical trials,
 which allows the investigator to proceed with recruitment
 when treatment is required urgently and prior consent is
 not feasible. 21 22 Some trials have sought parental assent
 prior to enrolment followed by a detailed informed
 consent to account for the emotional distress that parents
 experience affecting their ability to make informed deci-
 sions. 23 However, in our view, research without prior
 parental consent is not an appropriate option in LMICs
 due to lack of rigorous research governance in these
 settings. Serious concerns have been reported time and
 time again about the adequacy of informed consenting
 processes in pharmaceutical-­sponsored paediatric clin-
 ical trials in India. 24–26 This issue prompted the Indian
 government to tighten regulatory approval of research
 and to mandate A-­V recording of the informed consent
 process. 27 While this was a step in the right direction, these
 regulations were subsequently removed by the Govern-
 ment of India due to the difficulties in obtaining such
 A-­V recordings. Recent controversies about COVID-19
 vaccination trials in India using financial incentives and
 inadequate informed consenting had led to international
 condemnation of the research governance. 28 These
 malpractices are not uncommon in LMICs and therefore
 warrant a robust review and an oversight mechanism to
 protect vulnerable participants.
 While our study provides useful insights into the
 consenting process followed in a neonatal time-­critical
 trial in LMICs, it has certain limitations. First, although
 interview findings were supported by observations of
 A-­V recordings and clinician accounts, parent interviews
 were conducted at follow-­up visits approximately 18 to
 months after original consenting and recruitment, which
 is likely to have impacted on recall. To minimise the recall
 bias, we interviewed parents who were recruited towards
 the end of trial. Second, information on parent’s socio-
 demographic information was not captured in HELIX
 trial. However, there is no reason to believe that the
 study sample of 20 parents is not a representative sample
 since recruitment was done consecutively. Third, in most
 cases the A-­V recording seems to be done as a second
 or third layer of consenting, which precludes insight
 into initial recruitment discussions. The professionals
 reported that it was not easy for them to convince the
 parents to appear on the video recording and it required
 detailed explanation of the trial purpose and importance
 of recording the consenting process. They also reported
 that in certain cases where the baby was brought in at
 the very last minute, clinicians did not have the window
 to video record the consent. In such instances, A-­ V
 recording was done after the baby had been recruited to
 the trial. Hence, the analysis of consent videos may not
 have been a true depiction of consent process in all cases.
 Moreover, we interviewed only the parents of infants who
 survived. It is possible that those who had lost their infant
 had a different experience of trial participation. Finally,
 our study demonstrated an inadvertent contradiction
 between proforma assessments of A-­ V recordings and
 the observational as well as interview data highlight the
 inadequacy of quantitative assessments in such complex
 research questions and the need for in-­depth qualitative
 enquiry to understand the rigour of consent processes in
 
<section> LMIC trials.
 Better models for empowering parents and obtaining
 informed consent in LMIC needs to be carefully
 addressed in future trials. Innovative approaches using
 infographics and videos to communicate different
 aspects of trial may improve participant understanding
 and reduce anxiety, 29 30 and such techniques may facili-
 tate better informed consent in LMICs. Involving parents
 and family members in the design of studies would help
 in understanding their perspectives and addressing their
 priorities.
 
<section> CONCLUSION
 Our findings highlight the challenges of obtaining a truly
 informed consent in LMICs, despite having a rigorous
 protocol for seeking consent as well as regular quality
 assurance audits. Extremely vulnerable and disempow-
 ered parents who lacked capacity to understand trial
 information and make an autonomous decision were
 influenced by the way the trial was presented to them.
 Lack of clinician equipoise and trial outcomes suggest
 that ethical boards and research teams need to be
 cognisant of the possibility of systematic bias and thera-
 peutic misconception in emulating successful models of
 treatments from HICs to LMICs. Given the direct bene-
 fits of enhanced care anticipated by participants and
 their immense faith in the medical team, more efforts in
 finding culturally appropriate and innovative approaches
 to trial recruitment and consent seeking are needed for
 time critical trials conducted in LMICs.
 
<section> Author affiliations
 Centre for Perinatal Neuroscience, Imperial College London, London, UK
 Perinatal Trials Unit Foundation, Bengaluru, India
 Institute of Population Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
 Perinatal Trials Unit Foundation, Chennai, India
 Department of Neonatology, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University,
 
<section> Dhaka, Dhaka District, Bangladesh
 Disability Studies Department, University of Kelaniya, Kelaniya, Sri Lanka
 Pediatrics, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, Delhi, India
 Neonatal- Perinatal Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA
 
<section> Twitter Stuti Pant @pant_stuti
 
<section> Contributors SP led project management and supervision of field data collection,
 design and data interpretation, reviewed the literature and drafted the manuscript,
 and supported study conceptualisation with ST (Chief investigator). MAE conducted
 data collection and transcription. SP and MAE developed coding framework and
 generated themes in discussion with ST. MMM, BL, IJ and SPS contributed to semi-­ 
<section> quantitative assessments of A-­V recordings. SS and SR provided input into study
 design and interpretation. KW assisted with the interpretation of data and drafting
 of the manuscript. ST led study conceptualisation and supervised all aspects of
 the study. All authors provided critical revisions to the initial manuscript draft and
 approved the final paper.
 
<section> Funding SP is funded by a pre-­doctoral fellowship from the National Institute
 of Health Research (NIHR), UK and by an NIHR Research and Innovation for
 Global Health Transformation (RIGHT) program grant, MAE is funded by an NIHR
 RIGHT program grant and ST is funded by an NIHR advanced fellowship. The
 corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final
 responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.
 
<section> Disclaimer The funders had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis,
 data interpretation, or writing of the report.
 
<section> Competing interests None declared.
 
<section> Patient consent for publication Not required.
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
 
<section> Data availability statement Data are available on request. Anonymised data can
 be provided on a case-­by-­case basis on request made to the corresponding author,
 for the purpose of future and further research.
 
<section> Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has
 not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been
 peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those
 of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and
 responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content
 includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability
 of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines,
 terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error
 and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
 Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
 others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any
 purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given,
 and indication of whether changes were made. See: https://​creativecommons.​org/​
 licenses/​by/​4. /.
 
<section> ORCID iDs
 
<section> Stuti Pant http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002- 912-​5965
 Maya Annie Elias http://​orcid.​org/ 000-​0003-​3855-​0801
 
<section> REFERENCES
 1 Aurich B, Vermeulen E, Elie V, et al. Informed consent for neonatal
 trials: practical points to consider and a check list. BMJ Paediatr
 Open 2020;4:e000847.
 
<section> 2 Guidance H. Applying a proportionate approach to the process of
 seeking consent. NHS Health Research Authority, 2019.
 3 Woolfall K, Shilling V, Hickey H, et al. Parents’ agendas in paediatric
 clinical trial recruitment are different from researchers’ and often
 remain unvoiced: a qualitative study. PLoS One 2013;8:e67352.
 4 Chappuy H, Baruchel A, Leverger G, Oudot C, et al. Parental
 comprehension and satisfaction in informed consent in paediatric
 clinical trials: a prospective study on childhood leukaemia. Arch Dis
 Child 2010;95:800–4.
 5 Rani M, Bekedam H, Buckley BS. Improving health research
 governance and management in the Western Pacific: a WHO expert
 consultation. J Evid Based Med 2011;4:204–13.
 
<section> 6 Henderson GE, Churchill LR, Davis AM, Easter MM, et al. Clinical
 trials and medical care: defining the therapeutic misconception.
 
<section> PLoS Med 2007;4:e324.
 7 Joffe S, Cook EF, Cleary PD, Clark JW, et al. Quality of informed
 consent in cancer clinical trials: a cross-­sectional survey. The Lancet
 2001;358:1772–7.
 8 Appelbaum PS, Roth LH, Lidz CW, et al. False hopes and best data:
 consent to research and the therapeutic misconception. Hastings
 Cent Rep 1987;17:20.
 9 Patterson JK, Pant S, Jones DF, et al. Informed consent rates for
 neonatal randomized controlled trials in low- and lower middle-­
 income versus high-­income countries: a systematic review. PLoS
 One 2021;16:e0248263.
 10 OVea TS. Hypothermia for encephalopathy in low and middle-­
 income countries (HELIX): study protocol for a randomized
 controlled trial. Trials 2018;18:432.
 11 Schroeder DC, Hirsch J.;, F.; Fenet S. Ethics dumping case studies
 from north–south research: Springer Open 2018.
 12 Riess H, Kraft-­Todd G. E.M.P.A.T.H.Y.: a tool to enhance nonverbal
 communication between clinicians and their patients. Acad Med
 2014;89:1108–12.
 13 OECD. Measuring patient safety opening the black box. Available: ​
 Measuring_​patients_​desire_​for_​autonomy_​d.​pdf
 14 Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res
 Psychol 2006;3:77–101.
 
<section> 15 Braun VCV. Successful qualitative research: a practical guide for
 beginners. London: Sage, 2013.
 16 Boeije H. Quality and quantity. 2002;36:391–409.
 17 Wyllie J, Perlman JM, Kattwinkel J, et al. Part 7: Neonatal
 resuscitation: 2015 International Consensus on Cardiopulmonary
 Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science with
 treatment recommendations. Resuscitation 2015;95:e169–201.
 18 Chandrasekaran M, Swamy R, Ramji S, et al. Therapeutic
 hypothermia for neonatal encephalopathy in Indian neonatal units: a
 survey of national practices. Indian Pediatr 2017;54:969–70.
 19 See KC, Jamal SJ, Chiam ML. Short term outcome of therapeutic
 hypothermia in term infants with moderate to severe hypoxic
 ischaemic encephalopathy; the Sungai Buloh experience. Med J
 Malaysia 2012;67:265–8.
 20 T S. Hypothermia for encephalopathy in low and middle-­income
 countries. Hot topics in neonatology Washington 2020.
 21 Woolfall K, Frith L, Dawson A, et al. Fifteen-­minute consultation:
 an evidence-­based approach to research without prior consent
 (deferred consent) in neonatal and paediatric critical care trials. Arch
 Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2016;101:49–53.
 22 Furyk J, McBain-­Rigg K, Watt K, et al. Qualitative evaluation of
 a deferred consent process in paediatric emergency research: a
 
<section> PREDICT study. BMJ Open 2017;7:e018562.
 23 Maitland K, Molyneux S, Boga M, et al. Use of deferred consent for
 severely ill children in a multi-­centre phase III trial. Trials 2011;12:90.
 24 Sengupta A. Fatal trials: clinical trials are killing people. Indian J Med
 Ethics 2009;6:118–9.
 25 Over 24,000 clinical trial deaths and SAEs in India in ten years.
 
<section> Available: https://www.​sundayguardianlive.​com/​news/​11550-​over-​
 24000-​clinical-​trial-​deaths-​and-​saes-​india-​ten-​years
 26 Thousands of Indians die in unethical clinical trials. Available:
 https://www.​thenational.​ae/​world/​asia/​thousands-​of-​indians-​die-​in-​
 unethical-​clinical-​trials-​1.​770992
 27 Cressey D. India shakes up rules on clinical trials. Nature 2012;60.
 28 Kamala T. India is at centre of global vaccine manufacturing, but
 opacity threatens public trust. BMJ 2021:372.
 29 Shlobin NA, Sheldon M, Lam S. Informed consent in neurosurgery: a
 systematic review. Neurosurg Focus 2020;49:E6.
 30 Hutchison C, Cowan C, McMahon T, et al. A randomised controlled
 study of an audiovisual patient information intervention on informed
 consent and recruitment to cancer clinical trials. Br J Cancer
 2007;97:705–11.