
<section> To cite: Watson J, Osman IM-­E,
 
<section> Amon-­Tanoh M, et al. A
 cluster-­randomised controlled
 equivalence trial of the Surprise
 Soap handwashing intervention
 among older children living
 
<section> in a refugee settlement in
 
<section> Sudan. BMJ Glob Health
 2023;8:e012633. doi:10.1136/
 
<section> bmjgh-2023-012633
 
<section> Handling editor Valery Ridde
 
<section> ► Additional supplemental
 material is published online only.
 To view, please visit the journal
 online (http://​dx. d oi.​org/​10.​
 1136/ b mjgh-​2023- 12633).
 
<section> Received 20 April 2023
 Accepted 9 September 2023
 
<section> © Author(s) (or their
 employer(s)) 2023. Re-­use
 permitted under CC BY-­NC. No
 commercial re-­use. See rights
 and permissions. Published by
 BMJ.
 Department of Disease Control,
 London School of Hygiene and
 Tropical Medicine, London, UK
 Care International, Khartoum,
 
<section> Sudan
 Save the Children International,
 London, UK
 
<section> Department of Medical
 Statistics, London School of
 Hygiene & Tropical Medicine,
 
<section> London, UK
 
<section> Correspondence to
 
<section> Dr. Julie Watson;
 ​julie.​watson@​lshtm.​ac. u k
 
<section> A cluster-­randomised
 
<section> equivalence trial of the
 
<section> handwashing intervention
 
<section> children living in a refugee
 
<section> in Sudan
 
<section> Julie Watson , 1 Ibtihal Mohammed-­Elhassan
 Claudio Deola, 3 Amy MacDougall, 4 Oliver Cumming
 
<section> ABSTRACT
 
<section> Introduction Increasing handwashing with soap
 (HWWS) among older children in emergency settings can
 have a large public health impact, however, evidence
 on what works is limited. One promising approach is
 the ‘Surprise Soap’ intervention in which a novel soap
 with an embedded toy is delivered to children in a
 short, participatory household session that includes a
 glitter game and HWWS practice. Here, we evaluate this
 intervention against a standard intervention in a complex
 emergency setting.
 
<section> Methods A cluster-­randomised controlled equivalence
 trial was conducted in Naivasha refugee settlement,
 Sudan. Blinding was not possible. 203 randomly selected
 households, with at least one child aged 5–12, were
 randomised to receive the Surprise Soap intervention
 (n=101) or a standard intervention comprising a short
 household session with health messaging and plain
 soap distribution (n=102). The primary outcome was
 the proportion of prespecified potential HWWS events
 observed for children aged 5–12, accompanied by
 HWWS, at baseline, 4, 12 and 16 weeks post intervention
 delivery.
 
<section> Results 200 households were included in the analyses:
 101 intervention and 99 control. No difference in
 intervention effectiveness was observed at any follow-­up
 (4 weeks: adjusted rate ratio (RR) 1.2, 95% CI 0.8 to 1.7;
 12 weeks: RR 0.8, 95% CI 0.5 to 1.1; 16 weeks: RR 1.1,
 95% CI 0.8 to 1.5). However, we observed increased HWWS
 in both arms at 4 weeks (27 and 23 percentage point
 increase in the intervention and control arm, respectively)
 that was sustained at 16 weeks.
 
<section> Conclusions We find that the Surprise Soap intervention
 is no more effective at increasing older children’s
 HWWS than a standard, household-­level, health-­based
 intervention in this complex humanitarian emergency.
 There appears to be no marginal benefit in terms of HWWS
 that would justify the additional cost of implementing
 the Surprise Soap intervention. Further trials that include
 a passive control arm are needed to determine the
 independent effects of each intervention and guide future
 intervention design.
 
<section> controlled
 
<section> Surprise Soap
 
<section> among older
 
<section> settlement
 
<section> Osman, 2 Maud Amon-­Tanoh ,
 
<section> WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC
 
<section> ⇒ The Surprise Soap intervention—a handwashing in-
 tervention in which a novel soap with an embedded
 toy is delivered to older children in a participatory
 household session including a glitter game—has
 had promising results in a refugee camp in Iraq but
 it is unclear if it is effective in different complex hu-
 manitarian settings.
 
<section> WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
 
<section> ⇒ This study adds to the limited evidence base
 on what works in handwashing promotion for
 children in humanitarian contexts and specifi-
 cally to existing evidence on the effectiveness
 of the Surprise Soap intervention in different
 humanitarian settings. Results show that the
 Surprise Soap intervention is no more effective
 at increasing children’s handwashing than a
 standard, household-­level intervention involving
 health-­b ased messaging and provision of plain
 soap, in a refugee settlement in Sudan.
 
<section> HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH,
 
<section> PRACTICE OR POLICY
 
<section> ⇒ Implementing agencies should note that there
 appears to be no marginal benefit, in terms of
 handwashing, of implementing the Surprise
 Soap intervention over a standard intervention
 that would justify the additional cost. Further re-
 search is needed to determine the independent
 effects of each intervention and guide future in-
 tervention design.
 
<section> INTRODUCTION
 Handwashing with soap (HWWS) is an impor-
 tant public health behaviour that reduces
 transmission of infectious disease. HWWS
 alone can reduce diarrhoeal disease by 30%
 and acute respiratory infections (ARIs) by
 21%–23%. 2 3 HWWS has also been shown to
 reduce some neglected tropical diseases, such 
<section> as trachoma 4 and certain soil-­transmitted helminth infec-
 tions. 5
 To date, the majority of HWWS interventions have
 targeted caregivers as they are typically responsible for the
 hygiene of children under the age of 5—the age group
 at greatest risk of diarrhoeal disease and ARIs. 7 However,
 older children (classified as children between the ages of
 5 and 14 by the Global Burden of Disease studies ), also
 bear a high burden of these diseases. 7 Older children are
 becoming more independent. They are likely leaving the
 house more often, they may be starting or are already in
 school and are taking responsibility for their own hand-
 washing. Interventions directly targeting older children
 and encouraging them to practise HWWS are therefore
 also of great public health importance.
 HWWS interventions that reduce the transmission of
 diarrhoeal disease and ARIs among older children not
 only leads to lower rates of morbidity and mortality but
 also to non-­health benefits such as reductions in rates of
 school absence, 8–12 and consequently to higher academic
 attainment, 13 14 and associated economic and health
 benefits later in life. 15 After receiving HWWS interven-
 tions, older children may also act as agents of change,
 spreading these messages to their family members and
 the broader community. 16–20
 Interventions that increase older children’s HWWS in
 humanitarian settings are especially important. Children
 may constitute over half of the humanitarian population
 and factors in the environment, such as overcrowding,
 unclean water and sanitation facilities, environmental
 contamination and limited access to healthcare heighten
 their risk of disease. 21–24 Faecal-­oral diseases such as diar-
 rhoea, for example, are responsible for up to 40% of all
 deaths in the acute phase of an emergency.
 Evidence on what works in HWWS interventions
 targeted at older children is limited, particularly in
 humanitarian settings. Few HWWS interventions have
 been rigorously evaluated and those that have, have had
 mixed success. 25 26 One recent intervention which may be
 effective among older children in humanitarian settings
 is the ‘Surprise Soap’ intervention. 27 This intervention
 purports to encourage children’s HWWS by appealing
 to their innate motives of play and curiosity. Children
 receiving the intervention are given bars of Surprise
 Soap—transparent soaps with a toy embedded inside—
 within a short household session that communicates the
 importance of HWWS through fun, participatory activi-
 ties including a glitter game and HWWS practice, rather
 than via traditional health-­based messaging, which past
 research suggests may be a poor motivator of behaviour
 change. 28–31 The toy inside the soap incentivises children
 to wash their hands.
 An initial proof-­of-­concept trial of the Surprise Soap
 intervention among children living in an internally
 displaced persons (IDP) camp in Iraq found that after
 receiving this intervention children were four times more
 likely to practice HWWS at key times compared with the
 counterfactual—a standard health-­based household-­level
 handwashing intervention. 27 This trial was, however,
 limited to just one camp where the population was stable
 and homogenous (100% Yezidi), there was good access
 to soap and water, and children were already frequently
 exposed to hygiene promotion. Additionally, HWWS was
 only measured at one follow-­up, 4 weeks after interven-
 tion delivery. After this study, there were still unanswered
 questions: can the intervention be effective in different,
 more complex humanitarian settings where populations
 may be mixed and unstable, access to soap and water are
 lower, and there is little pre-­existing exposure to hygiene
 promotion and can the effect of the intervention be
 sustained beyond 4 weeks?
 To address these questions, two separate cluster-­
 randomised controlled equivalence trials were conducted,
 each with a follow-­up period of 16 weeks—one across IDP
 camps in Somalia and one in a large refugee settlement
 in Sudan. Both of these are complex humanitarian sites,
 which face specific challenges. Both sites suffer from
 limited infrastructure, political and population instability,
 poor access to healthcare, poor access to handwashing
 facilities with both soap and water, and limited exposure
 to health promotion, including HWWS promotion. The
 site in Somalia, however, hosts an ethnically heteroge-
 neous, internally displaced population whereas the site in
 Sudan hosts an ethnically homogeneous refugee popula-
 tion. In each trial, the effect of the Surprise Soap inter-
 vention on older children’s HWWS was compared with
 an active control—‘standard’ household-­level interven-
 tion comprising health-­based messages and plain soap.
 The results of the Somalia trial have been reported else-
 where. 32 Here, we report the results of the trial in Sudan.
 Our findings contribute both to the limited evidence base
 for HWWS interventions targeting older children and
 serve as a guide for any organisation seeking to deliver
 effective HWWS interventions in humanitarian settings.
 
<section> METHODS
 
<section> As described above, this is the second of two trials to
 assess the same intervention delivered in two different
 humanitarian settings by two different agencies. The
 study design and methods were standardised across both
 sites to permit comparison between studies and have
 been described previously.
 
<section> Study design and participants/eligibility
 This study is reported according to the Consolidated
 Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) reporting
 guidelines. 33 This study was a cluster-­ randomised
 controlled equivalence trial with an intervention arm
 receiving the Surprise Soap intervention and an active
 control arm receiving a standard handwashing interven-
 tion. The study took place between October 2021 and
 March 2022. Households were eligible to participate in
 the study if they included at least one child aged between
 5 and 12 years and had no plans to travel away for more
 than 1 week over the ensuing 6 months. Individual 
<insert> Table 1 Overview of intervention activities in each study arm
 Intervention arm
 Intervention
 Setting
 Surprise Soap Intervention
 Household
 Intensity One-­off promotion session with delivery agents,
 by three subsequent visits from agents to replenish
 only
 Session length 10–15 min
 Approach Targeting motives of play and curiosity and providing
 knowledge of how and when to wash hands
 Products Surprise Soap
 ×5 bars, plus later replenishments 
<iend>

 
<section> households were
 intervention arm
 
<section> Study setting
 The study took place
 refugee settlement
 is one of the largest
 ments, termed ‘open
 settlement was established
 Humanitarian Aid
 registered refugees,
 specifically from
 tions on shelter
 Naivasha reside in
 sheets, burlap, branches
 suffers from a lack
 infrastructure system
 to frequent power
 electricity), as well
 sanitation and solid
 water and sanitation,
 as healthcare and
 services dependent
 of children out-­of-­school.
 particularly gender-­based
 study, Care International
 tation, and Hygiene
 was accessed from
 tion was irregular,
 purchasing it is considered
 five hygiene promoters
 time of the study;
 targeted at children.
 
<section> Activities
 
<section> Delivery agent
 
<section> then randomly assigned (1:1) to the
 or the active control arm.
 
<section> among households in the Naivasha
 in Khartoum state, Sudan. Naivasha
 of the nine informal refugee settle-
 areas’, within Khartoum state. The
 in 2017 and is managed by the
 Commission. It houses over 10
 mostly from South Sudan 34 and
 the Dinka ethnic group. Due to restric-
 distribution, most of the population in
 makeshift shelters created from plastic
 and bamboo. The settlement
 of integration within the networked
 found within Khartoum, leading
 cuts, (assuming the household has
 as limited access to drinking water,
 waste management services. Beyond
 access to other basic services such
 education is limited, with health
 on humanitarian funding and 24%
 Protection risks are also high,
 violence. 34 At the time of this
 was the provider of Water, Sani-
 (WASH) services to Naivasha. Water
 communal pipes and soap distribu-
 leaving residents often without soap as
 unaffordable by many. Forty-­
 were active in Naivasha at the
 however, hygiene promotion was rarely
 Glitter game to demonstrate germs spreading
 Demonstration of handwashing technique
 Information on key times to wash hands
 Children practicing handwashing with Surprise Soap
 Care international hygiene promoters specifically
 to deliver the Surprise Soap intervention (no overlap
 with the hygiene promoters delivering the standard
 
<section> intervention)
 
<section> Intervention content and delivery
 Households assigned to the intervention arm received the
 Surprise Soap intervention, and households assigned to
 the active control arm received a standard handwashing
 promotion intervention. Each intervention was delivered
 to children at their house the day after baseline observa-
 tion was carried out. Hygiene promoters, already active
 under Care International were trained to deliver both
 interventions. The main features of the two interventions
 are presented in table 1 with further details given below.
 
<section> Surprise Soap intervention
 The Surprise Soap intervention consisted of distribu-
 tion of Surprise Soap bars within a short (approximately
 10–15 min) participatory household session in which
 children played a ‘glitter game’ and practised HWWS
 (table 1). Surprise Soaps are transparent glycerine soaps
 (145 g soap/bar) with toy animals embedded inside
 (figure 1). All soap bars were manufactured by the
 company, KIMA, in Jordan. Brief formative work which
 involved showing photos of potential toy options and
 soliciting feedback from site leaders, hygiene promoters
 and adult residents of the camps, was undertaken by
 Care International to ensure the toys were culturally
 appropriate. In the end, we had a range of 35 different
 toy animals and therefore 35 different bars of Surprise
 Soap. On arriving at their designated household,
 hygiene promoters gathered the children of the house-
 hold together and initiated the ‘glitter game’ to demon-
 strate how germs spread: petroleum jelly and glitter were
 applied to one child’s hands who then ‘high fived’ the
 other children, transferring the ‘glitter germs’ between
 hands. The hygiene promoter then revealed the Surprise
 
<section> Active control arm
 
<section> Standard Intervention
 
<section> Household
 followed One-­off promotion session with delivery agents,
 soap followed by three subsequent visits from agents to
 replenish soap only
 
<section> 10–15 min
 Delivering health-­based messaging and providing
 knowledge of how and when to wash hands
 Plain soap identical to Surprise Soap but minus
 
<section> the toy
 ×5 bars, plus later replenishments
 Handwashing-­related health-­messaging using F-­
 
<section> diagram
 Demonstration of handwashing technique
 Information on key times to wash hands
 trained Care international hygiene promoters specifically
 trained to deliver the standard intervention (no
 overlap with the hygiene promoters delivering the
 Surprise Soap intervention) 
<insert> Figure 1 Surprise Soap image. 
<iend>

 Soap bars to the children, explaining that the more often
 they wash their hands with the soap, the faster they will
 reach the toy inside, and listing five key handwashing
 times (before eating, before preparing food, before
 serving food to another person, after using the toilet and
 before cleaning another person’s faeces). The hygiene
 promoter then demonstrates the ideal handwashing
 technique, inviting the children to practice washing the
 glitter from their hands using the Surprise Soap, and
 then finally leaving a parcel of five Surprise Soaps with
 the children in the household (parcel directly handed
 to a child). At least one adult, usually a caregiver, was
 present during intervention delivery but they were not
 personally instructed on the use of these toy soaps. On
 the same day, directly after the 4 weeks, 12 weeks and 16
 weeks follow-­ up household observations, the hygiene
 promoters visited the households again to distribute
 further packages of Surprise Soap but did not repeat the
 household session. Soap packages all contained soaps
 with different toy animals so that the children did not
 receive the same toy twice over the intervention period.
 No handwashing messages were delivered during these
 follow-­up visits.
 
<section> Standard intervention received by control group
 The standard intervention consisted of the distribution
 of plain soap (145 g soap/bar), identical to the Surprise
 Soap in colour, size, shape, volume and quality but without
 a toy inside, delivered within a short household session
 (approximately 10–15 min—comparable to the length
 of the Surprise Soap household session) to control for
 the effects of soap provision and household-­level delivery
 (table 1). The household session focused on standard
 health-­based messages using some of Care internation-
 al’s existing handwashing promotion material. Hygiene
 promoters gathered the children and showed them the
 F-­ diagram, explaining how the spread of germs from
 faeces to mouths via hands can lead to diseases such
 as diarrhoea. They explained that HWWS can prevent
 these diseases, listed five key times to practice HWWS (as
 above) and demonstrated ideal handwashing technique.
 A parcel of five plain soaps were left with the children.
 Plain soap was also replenished directly after the 4 weeks,
 12 weeks and 16 weeks follow-­ up household observa-
 tions, in the same quantities as Surprise Soap, without
 repeating the household session.
 
<section> Outcomes
 
<section> The primary outcome of the trial was the proportion of
 five key potential handwashing events that were accom-
 panied by HWWS (both hands) for children aged 5–12
 years. The prespecified five key potential handwashing
 events were: (1) after defecation or using the toilet, (2)
 before eating, (3) before preparing food, (4) before
 serving food to another person and (5) after cleaning
 another child’s faeces. This outcome was measured at
 four time points: baseline (the day prior to intervention
 delivery), 4 weeks, 12 weeks and 16 weeks after interven-
 tion delivery.
 The two secondary outcomes of the trial were: the
 proportion of all observed handwashing events (hand-
 washing with water) where soap was used, and the total
 number of observed HWWS events across all time points.
 Secondary outcomes were assessed through structured
 observation at all four time points, as for the primary
 outcome. In addition, the presence of a handwashing
 station with soap available was also measured at all the
 four time points.
 A series of indicators of intervention compliance were
 also assessed in the arm receiving the Surprise Soap inter-
 vention at 16 weeks after intervention delivery. These
 included the number of bars of Surprise Soap remaining,
 whether a bar of Surprise Soap was wet on inspection at
 endline, the caregiver-­reported time in days required to
 reach the toy in the Surprise Soap, caregiver-­reported
 incidents of ‘toy cheats’ (ie, where the Surprise Soap bar
 was broken to access the toy prematurely), and caregiver-­
 reported use of the Surprise Soap by other household
 members (children <5 years of age and adults) and for
 other purposes than hand hygiene (bathing, laundry,
 washing dishes or any other uses).
 
<section> Data collection
 All data collection activities were undertaken by a team
 of trained enumerators who had no role in the delivery
 of the intervention. The research team provided a 3-­day
 training to field supervisors, involving both classroom
 and practical sessions, and supervisors subsequently
 trained enumerators in the local language. Recruitment
 was undertaken by enumerators and basic background
 social and demographic data were collected at the time
 of recruitment using a verbally administered question-
 naire. During the 4 weeks before intervention delivery, 
<section> one enumerator returned to each enrolled household
 to conduct direct structured observations of child hand-
 washing practices and to record data on household hand-
 washing facilities using spot-­check observations. Struc-
 tured observations started at approximately 9:30 hours
 and continued for 3 hours—a period when most children
 in this setting would be home. Data were collected for all
 children aged 5–12 years present in the household during
 the observation period. Enumerators positioned them-
 selves in an unobtrusive location in or near the house-
 hold where they had the best view of the children and the
 handwashing facility (where available). Every instance of
 the five key handwashing events (as defined above) and
 the associated handwashing practice (hands not washed,
 washed with water only, washed with soap and water)
 was recorded. Any instances of HWWS that were not
 associated with these five key events were also recorded.
 Structured observations were repeated 4 weeks, 12 weeks
 and 16 weeks post intervention delivery. In intervention
 households only, directly after the 16-­week structured
 observation, field workers also recorded information on
 intervention compliance. All data were collected using
 Open Data Kit on android tablets and uploaded onto a
 dedicated encrypted server at the end of each data collec-
 tion day for the research team at the London School of
 Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) to cross check
 the data daily.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement
 Patients, that is, our research participants, and members
 of the public were not involved in the design, conduct,
 reporting or dissemination plans of this research. As
 described above, we consulted members of the public
 (site leaders, hygiene promoters and adult residents of
 the camps) to ensure our design of Surprise Soap bars
 was culturally appropriate. Results of our research have
 been communicated with research participants via camp
 leaders. The authors of this research will disseminate
 findings via conferences and other presentations.
 
<section> Sample size and randomisation procedure
 We calculated that a sample size of 200 households—
 corresponding to clusters—was needed to detect an abso-
 lute difference in HWWS after key events of 10% between
 control and intervention arms (15% HWWS after key
 events in the control arm, 25% in the intervention arm),
 with 80% power (α=0·05). We assumed an average of
 seven observed HWWS events (ie, when hands could have
 been washed or not) per household per 3-­hour observa-
 tion period, a within-­household intracluster correlation
 coefficient of 0.21, 35 and a loss to follow-­up of 20%.
 Individual random sampling was employed by JW and
 MA-­T to select households in Naivasha using a complete
 list of all households in the site, randomised within Stata.
 If a household on the randomised list was non-­eligible
 the next household on the list was approached, and so on
 until a total of 200 households were enrolled. Enrolled
 households were then randomly assigned to intervention
 or control arm with a 1:1 ratio using a random number
 generator in Stata, V.16.1.
 
<section> Blinding
 
<section> The precise nature of the data being collected was not
 disclosed to participants, instead they were informed that
 the enumerators would be observing children’s routines
 to build an understanding of how children’s health and
 well-­being can be improved in the area. Enumerators were
 informed that all participating households would receive
 a hand hygiene intervention, but they were not informed
 of the nature of the intervention received by intervention
 and control arms, and they had no role in the intervention
 delivery. Due to the nature of the intervention, no further
 blinding of study participants or enumerators was possible.
 
<section> Statistical analysis
 All statistical analyses were undertaken using Stata, V.16.1.
 We analysed the effect of the intervention, compared with
 the standard intervention, on the proportion of key hand-
 washing events accompanied by HWWS using a Poisson
 Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) model for rates,
 in which the number of actual HWWS events was offset
 by the total number of potential handwashing events per
 child. The proportion of all handwashes that used soap,
 was similarly assessed using a Poisson model for rates
 in which the total observed children’s handwashes that
 used soap was offset by the number of observed hand-
 washes per child. Finally, the total number of observed
 handwashes with soap was analysed using a Poisson GEE
 model for counts. In all models, clustering was accounted
 for at the highest level, the household (because children
 were nested within the household). To increase precision,
 adjusted rate (or count) ratios were computed, adjusting
 for factors determined a priori to be associated with the
 outcome (age, sex, number of children aged 5–12 in the
 household and number of people earning in the house-
 hold). A p value threshold of 0.05 was considered statis-
 tically significant. The statistical models described above
 differ from the models we prespecified in our trial regis-
 tration (​osf.​io/​b6qc7)—multilevel mixed effects Poisson
 regression models. After further consultation with a stat-
 istician and prior to running any analyses, we determined
 the most appropriate model to be a GEE Poisson model
 given that we were interested in estimating population-­
 averaged effects. All covariates remained as prespecified.
 For transparency, we also ran the prespecified analyses
 and found no difference in overall outcomes (online
 supplemental file 3: prespecified analyses)
 A detailed author reflexivity statement has been
 provided as online supplemental file 4 accompanying
 this manuscript.
 The trial protocol is registered on the Open Science
 Framework (OSF), ​osf.​io/​va9yn
 
<section> RESULTS
 Participants and baseline data
 A total of 203 households were enrolled in the study. A
 total of 102 were randomly assigned to the active control 
<section> Figure 2 Trial profile. HH, household.
 
<section> arm and 101 were randomly assigned to the interven-
 tion arm. Three households, all from the active control
 arm, were lost to follow-­up. In error, two households
 from the active control arm received the Surprise Soap
 intervention instead of the prescribed standard interven-
 tion (figure 2). The results we present below are from
 our intention-­ to-­ treat analysis, however, we also ran a
 per-­ protocol analysis which aligns with these results
 (online supplemental file 1). The full data set is published
 alongside the paper (online supplemental file 2).
 Baseline prevalence of HWWS after key handwashing
 events was 12.4% in the intervention arm and 10.4% in
 the active control arm. Child-­level and household char-
 acteristics appeared well balanced between intervention 
<insert> Handwashing
  n (no of potential handwashing events observed)
  No of potential handwashing events where HWWS observed
  n (no of children observed)
  Age, years (mean, SD)
  Sex, female (n, %)
  n (no of households)
  Household head education score (mean, SD)
  No earning income (mean, SD)
  No household members (mean, SD)
  No of children <5 years of age (mean, SD)
  No of children 5–12 years of age (mean, SD)
  Period of residence, months (mean, SD)
  Handwashing station available (n, %)
  Soap available in household (n, %)
  Water available (n, %)
  Station reachable by children (n, %)
 Child
 Household
 HWWS, handwashing with soap.
 Table 2 Baseline characteristics 
<iend>

 and active control arm. Baseline characteristics are
 
<section> presented in table
 
<section> Prevalence of HWWS after intervention
 The prevalence of HWWS after key events increased
 after baseline observations in both the intervention
 (+27 percentage points) and control arm (+23 percentage
 points) and remained high throughout the 16-­ week
 follow-­up. At the final 16-­week follow-­up, HWWS preva-
 lence was up by 36 percentage points from baseline levels
 in both the intervention arm and control arm (figure 3).
 
<section> Availability of a handwashing station and soap after
 
<section> intervention
 
<section> The proportion of households with a handwashing
 station available increased in both arms, from 64% at
 baseline to 86% at endline in the intervention arm, and
 from 69% to 89% in the control arm. Availability of soap
 (any type of handwashing soap) in the household also
 increased in both arms. At endline, 59% of interven-
 tion households and 63% of control households were
 observed to have soap available, compared with baseline
 levels of 32% and 30%, respectively. Availability of water
 also increased in both arms. At endline 85% of interven-
 tion households and 89% of control households were
 observed to have water available in the household for
 handwashing, compared with baseline levels of 71% and
 
<section> 72%, respectively.
 
<section> Overall Intervention Control
 
<section> 1018
 (n, %) 117 (11.5) 67 (12.4) 50 (10.4)
 
<section> 8.40±2.49 8.32±2.41 8.48±2.56
 
<section> 228 (51) 
<section> 111 (49) 
<section> 117 (52)
 
<section> 0.72±0.74 0.78±0.76 0.66±0.71
 0.47±0.67 0.56±0.74 0.37±0.58
 8.11±3.01 8.10±3.11 8.12±2.92
 1.30±1.14 1.22±0.94 1.37±1.31
 2.81±1.38 2.86±1.44 2.75±1.32
 70.79, 10.80 72.20, 8.78 69.39, 12.37
 
<section> 135 (67) 
<section> 65 (64) 
<section> 70 (69)
 
<section> 63 (31) 
<section> 32 (32) 
<section> 31 (30)
 
<section> 145 (71) 
<section> 72 (71) 
<section> 73 (72)
 
<section> 128 (95) 
<section> 63 (97) 
<section> 65 (93)
 
<section> Primary outcome
 There was no evidence of a difference in the proportion
 of key handwashing events that were accompanied by
 HWWS for children aged 5–12 years between the inter-
 vention and control arm at the 4-­week follow-­up, the
 12-­ week follow-­ up or the 16-­ week follow-­ up (16-­ week
 follow-­up: rate ratio (RR) 1.1, 95% CI 0.8 to 1.5, p=0.71)
 (table 3).
 
<section> Secondary outcomes
 There was no evidence of a difference in the proportion
 of all handwashes that used soap between the interven-
 tion and control arm at the 4-­week follow-­up, the 12-­week
 follow-­up or the 16-­week follow-­up (16-­week follow-­up:
 RR 1.0, 95% CI 0.8 to 1.3, p=0.90) (table 4).
 There was no evidence of a difference in the total
 number of handwashes with soap between the interven-
 tion and control arm at the 4-­week, 12-­week or 16-­week
 follow-­ up (Count ratio (CR): 1.0, 95% CI 0.7 to 1.4,
 p=0.90) (table 5).
 To assess the robustness of our findings, we conducted
 a robustness check by including enumerator identity as a
 covariate in each of our GEE Poisson regression models,
 since there may have been inherent differences in the way
 each enumerator performed observations. The results of
 this robustness check (online supplemental file 3: robust-
 ness check) indicate that enumerator identity did not
 have a significant impact on the overall outcomes. 
<insert> Figure 3 Prevalence of handwashing with soap among the intervention
 weeks postintervention delivery. 
<iend>

 
<insert> Table 3 Effect of intervention on the proportion of key handwashing events accompanied by HWWS
 Intervention Control Rate ratio* 95% CI P value
 Baseline (n, %)
 Week 4 (n, %)
 67 (12.4%)
 189 (38.9%)
 50 (10.6%)
 1.46 (33.0%)
 1.1
 1.2
 0.6 to 1.9
 0.8 to 1.7
 0.81
 0.44
 Week 12 (n, %)
 Week 16 (n, %)
 189 (40.3%)
 198 (48.3%)
 208 (50.1%)
 174 (45.9%)
 0.8
 1.1
 0.5 to 1.1
 0.8 to 1.5
 0.11
 0.71
 Poisson for rates generalised estimating equations analyses accounting for clustering at the household level.
 *Adjusted for age, sex, number of children aged 5–12 in the household, and number of household members earning an income.
 HWWS, handwashing with soap. 
<iend>

 We also conducted an exploratory subgroup analysis to
 assess the impact of a child’s age group on our primary
 results as children of different ages may experience the
 intervention differently. Two age groups were defined:
 ages 5–8 and ages 9–12. Results of the analysis revealed
 no notable difference in the effect of the intervention
 across the two age groups (online supplemental file 3:
 subgroup analyses 1).
 An exploratory subgroup analysis was also under-
 taken to assess the impact of the number of children
 between the age of 5 and 12 living in the household
 as this appeared to be a source of heterogeneity at
 baseline. Two subgroups were defined: households
 with three or fewer children aged 5–12 living in the
 household and households with four or more chil-
 dren living in the household. Results of the analysis
 revealed no notable difference in the effect of the
 intervention across the two groups (online supple-
 mental file 3: subgroup analyses 2).
 
<section> and active control arm at baseline and 4, 12 and 16
 
<section> Compliance in the intervention arm
 At the 16-­week follow-­up, all households in the inter-
 vention arm (n=101) reported that they had finished at
 least one bar of Surprise Soap, indicating they had all
 engaged with the intervention. Forty-­one per cent (n=41)
 of households still had at least one bar of Surprise Soap
 remaining and among these households, an average of
 two (95% CI 1.3 to 1.9) bars of Surprise Soap remained
 per household. Of the 41 households with some Surprise
 Soap remaining, 46% (n=19) had a bar of Surprise Soap
 that was wet on inspection indicating that just under half
 of these households were still engaging with the interven-
 tion 16 weeks later. In 40% of the households, adults also
 used the Surprise Soaps, and 55% of households with
 children under 5 reported that these young children also
 used the Surprise Soaps. Seventy-­five percent of house-
 holds reported that the Surprise Soap bars were used for
 purposes other than handwashing, with bathing being
 the most common alternative use reported. It took, on 
<insert> Intervention Control Risk ratio* 95% CI P value
 Baseline (n, %)
 Week 4 (n, %)
 81 (20.2)
 205 (49.4)
 63 (17.4)
 157 (46.2)
 1.1
 1.0
 0.7 to 1.9
 0.8 to 1.4
 0.60
 0.79
 Week 12 (n, %)
 Week 16 (n, %)
 196 (51.3)
 215 (58.7)
 228 (63.5)
 194 (59.0)
 0.8
 1.0
 0.6 to 1.1
 0.8 to 1.3
 0.11
 0.90
 Poisson for rates generalised estimating equations analyses accounting for clustering at the household level.
 *Adjusted for age, sex, number of children aged 5–12 in the household, and number of household members earning an income.
 Table 4 Effect of intervention on the proportion of all handwashes that used soap 
<iend>

 
<insert> Table 5 Effect of intervention on the total number of handwashes with soap
 Intervention Control Count ratio* 95% CI P value
 Baseline (n)
 Week 4 (n)
 1.1
 1.2
 0.7 to 1.9
 0.8 to 1.7
 0.69
 0.47
 Week 12 (n)
 Week 16 (n)
 0.7
 1.0
 0.5 to 1.0
 0.7 to 1.4
 0.08
 0.90
 Poisson for counts generalised estimating equations analyses accounting for clustering at the household level.
 *Adjusted for age, sex, number of children aged 5–12 in the household, and number of household members earning an income. 
<iend>

 average, 5 days (95% CI 4.4 to 5.0) for children to reach
 the toy by washing their hands. Fourteen percent of
 households reported ‘toy cheats’—children who deliber-
 ately broke the soap to get the toy inside. On average,
 these households reported that three bars (95% CI 2.0 to
 3.8) of Surprise Soap, out of the 17 bars received over the
 intervention period, were purposefully broken.
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 
<section> We find the Surprise Soap intervention, in which novel
 soap with embedded toys are delivered to older chil-
 dren in a participatory household session that includes
 a glitter game and HWWS practice, to be no more effec-
 tive than a standard household-­level handwashing inter-
 vention based on health-­ messaging and the provision
 of plain soap, in a large refugee settlement in Sudan.
 These results align with the results of a recent cluster
 randomised controlled equivalence trial of the Surprise
 Soap intervention across IDP camps in Somalia. 32 Like the
 Somalia trial, these results differ from an earlier proof-­of-­
 concept study undertaken in Northern Iraq that found
 the Surprise Soap intervention to be four times more
 effective than the same standard handwashing inter-
 vention employed there. 26 In Sudan and Somalia, there
 appears to be no marginal benefit of the Surprise Soap
 intervention over the standard intervention in terms of
 older children’s HWWS behaviour that would justify the
 additional costs incurred (in our study, a Surprise Soap
 bar costed US$2 compared with US$1.5 for the plain
 soap bar).
 Although there was no difference in effect between the
 intervention arm and our active control arm, in both trial
 arms, we observed an equally large and sustained increase
 in children’s HWWS from baseline to all follow-­ups. Our
 study is not designed to assess the independent effects of
 each intervention and there are several possible expla-
 nations for the increased rates of HWWS over time, for
 example, seasonal differences, disease outbreaks, expo-
 sure to other handwashing awareness campaigns and the
 introduction of various biases related to lack of blinding
 in the study. However, one possible explanation for the
 upwards trends in both trial arms is that both the Surprise
 Soap intervention and the standard intervention were
 effective at increasing children’s HWWS. Similar upwards
 trends in the intervention arm and the active control arm
 were also observed in the Somalia trial meaning all three
 studies of the Surprise Soap intervention (Iraq, Somalia
 and Sudan) observed an increase in older children’s
 HWWS. 27 32 Further trials with a passive control arm are
 needed to determine the individual effects of both inter-
 ventions. The discussion which follows assumes that the
 upwards trends observed in both arms of this study are
 directly attributable to the Surprise Soap and standard
 intervention. This is only an assumption, and we later
 discuss other possible explanations for these upwards
 trends within our limitations section.
 The upwards trends in children’s HWWS in both
 trial arms may point to the importance of what some
 researchers have termed the ‘form of delivery’. 37 Both
 the Surprise Soap intervention and the standard inter-
 vention were delivered by hygiene promoters directly to
 children within their own house. This delivery format
 is itself rather unusual. Hygiene promotion interven-
 tions are typically delivered to children within schools
 or in child-­ friendly spaces (in humanitarian settings)
 as part of a larger programme. 26 Interacting with chil-
 dren in their household one-­on-­one or in a small group
 is likely to be more engaging and may instil a greater 
<section> sense of ownership over their own handwashing and
 may encourage caregivers to reinforce messages. Addi-
 tionally, both interventions were relatively low-­resource
 and quick to implement sessions making them feasible
 to deliver in emergency settings. When practitioners are
 designing interventions, it is important that they think
 not only about intervention content but also about the
 form of delivery. We cannot say if either intervention
 would be effective if delivered in schools. However, given
 that school-­based handwashing interventions have faced
 multiple challenges in the past, we hypothesise that this
 form of delivery may be less effective. 38–42
 The combination of behaviour change techniques
 (BCTs) used in both the Surprise Soap intervention and
 the standard intervention may have also contributed to
 their apparent effectiveness. Both interventions provided
 soap, information on key times to wash hands, and a
 demonstration of correct handwashing technique. All
 three BCTs have been found to contribute positively to
 intervention effectiveness and using them in combina-
 tion in HWWS interventions targeting older children has
 been recommended previously. 26 Ultimately, what this
 trial and the trial in Somalia might indicate, if both inter-
 ventions were shown to be independently effective in
 future trials, is that well-­designed handwashing interven-
 tions that directly target children at a household level,
 ensure an enabling physical environment, and teach
 children how and when to practise HWWS are important
 public health interventions in emergency settings.
 Our results indicate that implementing the Surprise
 Soap intervention over a standard household-­ level
 HWWS intervention in complex humanitarian settings
 such as the Naivasha refugee settlement in Sudan is
 not a cost-­effective choice. In the absence of a passive
 control arm, we cannot make recommendations around
 the implementation of the standard intervention. If the
 upwards trends in HWWS observed in both of our trial
 arms were proven to be directly attributable to the inter-
 vention this could encourage prioritisation, and aid in
 the design of future HWWS interventions for older chil-
 dren in emergencies. We therefore believe similar trials
 with the addition of a passive control arm to be of public
 health interest.
 Our study has several limitations. First, our results
 may be subject to observer bias as it was not possible to
 blind enumerators to intervention status. Sampling both
 intervention and control households within one site also
 prevented us from blinding participants to intervention
 status. Being aware that you received Surprise Soap and
 others received only plain soap may lead to courtesy bias
 in the intervention arm. Second, sampling within one
 site may also have led to contamination of intervention
 messages across trial arms and biased the estimate of
 intervention effect towards the null. It is unlikely that
 intervention households shared their bars of Surprise
 Soap with active control households given we ensured
 different toy animals were received in each soap (ie, there
 was no need for children to trade toys) and no sharing
 was reported by caregivers or children in follow-­up quali-
 tative discussions held with the study participants. Third,
 as mentioned above, without a passive control arm, our
 trial design does not permit causal inference regarding
 the independent effects of each intervention; we are only
 able to report correlations we observed and make assump-
 tions. Fourth, although we used the ‘gold standard’ 43
 for measuring HWWS, structured observations are still
 prone to social desirability bias, 44 observer bias and the
 ‘Hawthorne effect’ or reactivity bias, 45 where children
 modify their behaviour in response to their awareness
 of being observed. 44 46 We tried to minimise the effects
 of these biases by using prolonged observation periods
 (3 hours) and by having multiple follow-­ ups, which
 likely reduces the risk of reactivity bias. 47 Nonetheless,
 these biases may have led to inflated rates of HWWS and
 contributed to the upwards trends in HWWS observed
 in both trial arms. Fifth, ‘Teaching to the test’—where
 participants alter their behaviour to align with the objec-
 tives of the study may have also contributed to upwards
 trends being observed in both arms, as well as other
 unknown changes in the camp that were independent of
 our intervention. The large increase in the availability of
 soap at handwashing stations from baseline to endline in
 both trial arms—a proxy indicator of HWWS —however,
 suggests that the upward trends in HWWS may, at least in
 part, be attributable to the interventions but without a
 passive control group, this is still only a hypothesis. Sixth,
 it should be noted that the plain soap, delivered as part
 of the standard intervention was identical to the Surprise
 Soap minus the toy. This is different to the plain soap
 typically used in Naivasha—it was scented and colourful
 and participants perceived it to be of higher quality and
 more attractive. The relative attractiveness of this soap
 may have provided an additional motivation for chil-
 dren to use it; a study among internally displaced chil-
 dren in Iraq found quality of handwashing materials to
 be a determinant of children’s handwashing behaviour.
 It is unclear if distributing ‘regular’ plain soap within a
 standard household session would have led to the same
 results. A future multi-­arm trial would be necessary to
 confirm this. Finally, we did not collect data on what toys
 the children already had access to prior to this study, so
 we cannot assess how novel the toys we distributed were to
 them. However, from qualitative discussions we had with
 the children following the study they all reported finding
 the toys they received appealing and said that they would
 like to see Surprise Soap distributed in the future.
 
<section> CONCLUSIONS
 Our findings suggest that, in complex humanitarian
 emergencies, the Surprise Soap intervention, involving
 the distribution of bars of soap with embedded toys in
 a participatory household session that includes a glitter
 game and handwashing practice, is no more effective
 at increasing older children’s HWWS than a standard,
 household-­ level intervention involving health-­ based 
<section> messaging and the provision of plain soap. There is no
 marginal benefit in terms of HWWS to justify the addi-
 tional cost of the Surprise Soap intervention, associated
 with including toys inside of soap. Future trials with a
 passive control arm are needed to determine the inde-
 pendent effects of each intervention and guide future
 
<section> intervention design.
 
<section> Acknowledgements We extend our deep gratitude to all the participating
 households who made this study possible. Thank you also to the entire Care
 International team in Sudan, including the enumerators and hygiene promoters
 who worked tirelessly to execute this study despite facing many challenges. An
 author reflexivity statement is included with this publication as online supplemental
 file.
 
<section> Contributors JW conceived of the study, monitored data collection, analysed
 and interpreted the data, and led the writing of the manuscript. IO contributed to
 the study design, management of data collection, analysis and interpretation of
 data, and manuscript writing. MA-­T contributed to study design and monitoring of
 data collection. CD contributed to study design and interpretation of the data. AM
 supported data analysis and interpretation. OC contributed to the study design, and
 the analysis and interpretation of the data and was a major contributor to writing
 the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. JW was the
 guarantor of the study.
 
<section> Funding Funding for this project was provided by Enhancing Learning & Research
 for Humanitarian Assistance (ELRHA), grant number 50680.
 
<section> Competing interests None declared.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were not involved in
 the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.
 
<section> Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
 
<section> Ethics approval Ethical approval was granted by the London School of Hygiene
 and Tropical Medicine Research Ethics Committee (Ref: 22905) and the National
 Research Ethics Review Committee at the Federal Ministry of Health, Sudan (Ref:
 10-­1-­21). Written informed consent was sought from all participating households
 before enrolment.
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
 
<section> Data availability statement All data relevant to the study are included in the
 article or uploaded as online supplemental information. The dataset is included as
 online supplemental file.
 
<section> Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has
 not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been
 peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those
 of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and
 responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content
 includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability
 of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines,
 terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error
 and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
 Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which
 permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially,
 and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
 properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the
 use is non-­commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
 
<section> ORCID iDs
 
<section> Julie Watson http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1487-2443
 Maud Amon- T anoh http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9838-7837
 Oliver Cumming http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5074-8709
 
<section> REFERENCES
 1 Wolf J, Hubbard S, Brauer M, et al. Effectiveness of interventions to
 improve drinking water, sanitation, and handwashing with soap on
 risk of diarrhoeal disease in children in low-­income and middle-­
 income settings: a systematic review and meta-­analysis. Lancet
 2022;400:48–59.
 
<section> 2 Aiello AE, Coulborn RM, Perez V, et al. Effect of hand hygiene on
 infectious disease risk in the community setting: a meta-­analysis.
 
<section> Am J Public Health 2008;98:1372–81.
 3 Rabie T, Curtis V. Handwashing and risk of respiratory infections: a
 quantitative systematic review. Trop Med Int Health 2006;11:258–67.
 4 Stocks ME, Ogden S, Haddad D, et al. Effect of water, sanitation,
 and hygiene on the prevention of trachoma: a systematic review and
 meta-­analysis. PLoS Med 2014;11:e1001605.
 5 Strunz EC, Addiss DG, Stocks ME, et al. Sanitation, hygiene, and
 soil-­transmitted helminth infection: a systematic review and meta-­
 analysis. PLOS Med 2014;11:e1001620.
 6 Garn JV, Wilkers JL, Meehan AA, et al. Interventions to
 improve water, sanitation, and hygiene for preventing soil‐
 transmitted helminth infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
 2022;6:CD012199.
 7 Vos T, Lim SS, Abbafati C, et al. Global burden of 369 diseases and
 injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990-­2019: a systematic
 analysis for the global burden of disease study 2019. Lancet
 2020;396:1204–22.
 8 Willmott M, Nicholson A, Busse H, et al. Effectiveness of hand
 hygiene interventions in reducing illness absence among children in
 educational settings: a systematic review and meta-­analysis. Arch
 Dis Child 2016;101:42–50.
 9 Nandrup-­Bus I. Mandatory handwashing in elementary schools
 reduces absenteeism due to infectious illness among pupils: a pilot
 intervention study. Am J Infect Control 2009;37:820–6.
 10 Talaat M, Afifi S, Dueger E, et al. Effects of hand hygiene campaigns
 on incidence of laboratory-­confirmed influenza and absenteeism in
 schoolchildren, Cairo, Egypt. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17:619–25.
 11 Azor-­Martinez E, Cobos-­Carrascosa E, Seijas-­Vazquez ML, et al.
 
<section> Hand hygiene program decreases school absenteeism due to upper
 respiratory infections. J Sch Health 2016;86:873–81.
 12 Mohamed NA, Mohd Rani MD, Tengku Jamaluddin TZM, et al. Effect
 of hand hygiene intervention on the absenteeism of pre-­school
 children in Klang valley, Malaysia: a quasi-­experimental study. World
 
<section> J Pediatr 2020;16:416–21.
 13 Lamdin DJ. Evidence of student attendance as an independent
 variable in education production functions. J Educ Res
 1996;89:155–62.
 14 Morrissey TW, Hutchison L, Winsler A. Family income, school
 attendance, and academic achievement in elementary school. Dev
 Psychol 2014;50:741–53.
 15 Gakidou E, Cowling K, Lozano R, et al. Increased educational
 attainment and its effect on child mortality in 175 countries between
 1970 and 2009: a systematic analysis. Lancet 2010;376:959–74.
 16 Bresee S, Caruso BA, Sales J, et al. 'A child is also a teacher':
 exploring the potential for children as change agents in the context
 of a school-­based WASH intervention in rural Eastern Zambia.
 
<section> Health Educ Res 2016;31:521–34.
 17 Onyango-­Ouma W, Aagaard-­Hansen J, Jensen BB. The potential of
 schoolchildren as health change agents in rural Western Kenya. Soc
 Sci Med 2005;61:1711–22.
 18 Winter JC, Darmstadt GL, Lee SJ, et al. The potential of school-­
 based WASH programming to support children as agents of change
 in rural Zambian households. BMC Public Health 2021;21:1812.
 19 Quick R, Blanton E, Mwaki A, et al. Evaluation of the role of school
 children in the promotion of point-­of-­use water treatment and
 handwashing in schools and households--Nyanza province. Am J
 Trop Med Hyg 2010;82:664–71.
 20 Tidwell JB, Gopalakrishnan A, Unni A, et al. Impact of a teacher-­led
 school handwashing program on children’s handwashing with soap
 at school and home in Bihar, India. PLOS ONE 2020;15:e0229655.
 21 UNHCR. Global trends: forced displacement in 2015. Geneva; 2015.
 22 Toole MJ, Waldman RJ. The public health aspects of complex
 emergencies and refugee situations. Annu Rev Public Health
 1997;18:283–312.
 23 Connolly MA, Gayer M, Ryan MJ, et al. Communicable diseases
 in complex emergencies: impact and challenges. Lancet
 2004;364:1974–83.
 24 Kouadio IK, Aljunid S, Kamigaki T, et al. Infectious diseases following
 natural disasters: prevention and control measures. Expert Rev Anti
 Infect Ther 2012;10:95–104.
 25 Watson JA, Ensink JHJ, Ramos M, et al. Does targeting children
 with hygiene promotion messages work? The effect of handwashing
 promotion targeted at children, on diarrhoea, soil-­transmitted
 helminth infections and behaviour change. Trop Med Int Health
 2017;22:526–38.
 26 Watson J, Cumming O, MacDougall A, et al. Effectiveness of
 behaviour change techniques used in hand hygiene interventions
 targeting older children - a systematic review. Soc Sci Med
 2021;281:114090. 
<section> 27 Watson J, Dreibelbis R, Aunger R, et al. Child's play: harnessing
 play and curiosity motives to improve child handwashing in a
 humanitarian setting. Int J Hyg Environ Health 2019;222:177–82.
 28 White S, Thorseth AH, Dreibelbis R, et al. The determinants of
 handwashing behaviour in domestic settings: an integrative
 systematic review. Int J Hyg Environ Health 2020;227:113512.
 29 Biran A, Schmidt W-­P, Wright R, et al. The effect of a soap promotion
 and hygiene education campaign on handwashing behaviour
 in rural India: a cluster randomised trial. Trop Med Int Health
 2009;14:1303–14.
 30 Curtis VA, Danquah LO, Aunger RV. Planned, motivated and habitual
 hygiene behaviour: an eleven country review. Health Educ Res
 2009;24:655–73.
 31 Rheinländer T, Samuelsen H, Dalsgaard A, et al. Teaching minority
 children hygiene: investigating hygiene education in Kindergartens
 and homes of ethnic minority children in northern Vietnam. Ethn
 Health 2015;20:258–72.
 32 Watson J, Amon-­Tanoh MA, Deola C, et al. Effect of a novel
 hygiene intervention on older children's handwashing in a
 humanitarian setting in Kahda district, Somalia: a cluster-­
 randomised controlled equivalence trial. Int J Hyg Environ Health
 2023;250:114163.
 33 Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D. Statement: updated guidelines for
 reporting parallel group randomised trials. Int J Surg 2010.
 34 UNHCR. Sudan: site profile - Khartoum ‘open areas'. 2020.
 
<section> Available: https://reliefweb.int/report/sudan/sudan-site-profile-​
 
<section> khartoum-open-areas
 35 Biran A, Schmidt W-­P, Varadharajan KS, et al. Effect of a
 behaviour-­change intervention on Handwashing with soap in India
 (Superamma): a cluster-­randomised trial. Lancet Glob Health
 2014;2:e145–54.
 
<section> 36 StataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 16. College Station,
 TX: StataCorp LP, 2019.
 37 Dombrowski SU, O’Carroll RE, Williams B. Form of delivery as a key
 ‘active ingredient’ in behaviour change interventions. Br J Health
 Psychol 2016;21:733–40.
 38 Saboori S, Mwaki A, Porter S, et al. Sustaining school hand washing
 and water treatment programmes: lessons learned and to be
 learned. Waterlines 2011;30:298–311.
 
<section> 39 Antwi-­Agyei P, Mwakitalima A, Seleman A, et al. Water, sanitation
 and hygiene (WASH) in schools: results from a process evaluation of
 the National sanitation campaign in Tanzania. J Water Sanit Hyg Dev
 2017;7:140–50.
 40 Deroo L, Walter E, Graham J. Monitoring and evaluation of WASH in
 schools programs: lessons from implementing organizations.
 
<section> J Water Sanit Hyg Dev 2015;5:512–20.
 41 Alexander KT, Dreibelbis R, Freeman MC, et al. Improving service
 delivery of water, sanitation, and hygiene in primary schools:
 a cluster-­randomized trial in Western Kenya. J Water Health
 2013;11:507–19.
 42 Alexander KT, Mwaki A, Adhiambo D, et al. The life-­cycle costs
 of school water, sanitation and hygiene access in Kenyan primary
 schools. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2016;13:637.
 43 Biran A, Rabie T, Schmidt W, et al. Comparing the performance of
 indicators of hand-­washing practices in rural Indian households.
 
<section> Trop Med Int Health 2008;13:278–85.
 44 Ram PK, Halder AK, Granger SP, et al. Is structured observation
 a valid technique to measure handwashing behavior? Use of
 acceleration sensors embedded in soap to assess reactivity to
 structured observation. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010;83:1070–6.
 45 McCambridge J, Witton J, Elbourne DR. Systematic review of the
 hawthorne effect: new concepts are needed to study research
 participation effects. J Clin Epidemiol 2014;67:267–77.
 46 Grover E, Hossain MK, Uddin S, et al. Social influence on
 handwashing with soap: results from a cluster randomized controlled
 trial in Bangladesh. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2018;99:934–6.
 47 Halder AK, Molyneaux JW, Luby SP, et al. Impact of duration of
 structured observations on measurement of handwashing behavior
 at critical times. BMC Public Health 2013;13:705.
 48 Ram PK, Sahli M, Arnold B, et al. Validity of Rapid Measures of
 Handwashing Behavior; An analysis of data from Multiple Impact
 Evaluations in the Global Scaling Up Handwashing Project.
 
<section> Washington, DC: Water and Sanitation Program/The World Bank,
 2014.
 49 Watson J, Cumming O, Aunger R, et al. Child handwashing in an
 internally displaced persons camp in northern Iraq: a qualitative
 multi-­method exploration of motivational drivers and other
 handwashing determinants. PLOS ONE 2020;15:e0228482.