
<section> To cite: Harvey S, Abramsky T,
 
<section> Mshana G, et al. A cluster
 randomised controlled trial to
 evaluate the impact of a gender
 transformative intervention
 on intimate partner violence
 against women in newly formed
 neighbourhood groups in
 Tanzania. BMJ Global Health
 2021;6:e004555. doi:10.1136/
 
<section> bmjgh-2020-004555
 
<section> Handling editor Seye Abimbola
 
<section> ► 
<section> Additional online
 supplemental material is
 published online only. To view,
 please visit the journal online
 (http://​dx.​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​
 bmjgh-​2020-​004555).
 
<section> Received 25 November 2020
 Accepted 16 March 2021
 
<section> © Author(s) (or their
 employer(s)) 2021. Re-­use
 permitted under CC BY-­NC. No
 commercial re-­use. See rights
 and permissions. Published by
 BMJ.
 For numbered affiliations see
 end of article.
 
<section> Correspondence to
 
<section> Dr Sheila Harvey;
 ​sheila.​harvey@ l shtm.​ac. u k
 
<section> A cluster randomised
 
<section> evaluate the impact of
 
<section> transformative intervention
 
<section> partner violence against
 
<section> newly formed neighbourhood
 
<section> in Tanzania
 
<section> Sheila Harvey, 1,2 Tanya Abramsky , 1 Gerry
 Grace J Mtolela, 2 Flora Madaha, 2 Ramadhan
 Charlotte Watts, 1 Shelley Lees , 1 Saidi Kapiga
 
<section> ABSTRACT
 
<section> Introduction Violence against women is a global
 public health concern; around a quarter of women will
 experience intimate partner physical or sexual violence
 during their lifetime. We assessed the impact of a gender
 transformative intervention for women designed to prevent
 intimate partner violence (IPV).
 
<section> Methods We conducted a cluster randomised controlled
 trial in Mwanza city, Tanzania, among women in newly
 formed neighbourhood groups to evaluate a 10-­session
 participatory intervention that aims to empower women,
 prevent IPV and promote healthy relationships. Following
 a baseline interview, groups were randomly assigned (1:1
 ratio) to the intervention or control arm. An intention-­to-­
 treat analysis was conducted to assess the impact of the
 intervention on the main outcomes, assessed 24 months
 postintervention. These included past-­year physical IPV
 and sexual IPV (primary); past-­year emotional abuse; and
 acceptability and tolerance of IPV.
 
<section> Results Between September 2015 and February 2017,
 1265 women were recruited in 66 neighbourhoods and
 randomly allocated to intervention (n=627 women in
 33 neighbourhoods) or control (n=638 women in
 neighbourhoods). Assessment of outcomes was completed
 for 551 (88%) intervention and 575 (90%) control women.
 Among intervention women, 113 (21%) reported physical
 IPV compared with 117 (20%) control women (adjusted OR
 (aOR) 0.98, 95% CI 0.72 to 1.33, p=0.892), and 109 (20%)
 intervention women reported sexual IPV compared with
 121 (21%) control women (aOR 0.98, 95% CI 0.72 to 1.32,
 p=0.881). Intervention women reported less emotional
 abuse (aOR 0.74, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.98, p=0.035), and were
 less likely to express attitudes accepting of IPV (aOR 0.49,
 95% CI 0.36 to 0.66, p<0.001), and beliefs that IPV is a
 private matter (aOR 0.54, 95% CI 0.38 to 0.78, p=0.001),
 or should be tolerated (aOR 0.48, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.66, impacting
 p<0.001). 
<section> sufficient
 
<section> Conclusion These results indicate that the intervention Trial
 was effective in reducing emotional abuse and positively
 
<section> controlled trial to
 
<section> a gender
 
<section> on intimate
 
<section> women in
 
<section> groups
 
<section> Mshana, 3 Christian Holm Hansen,
 Hashim, 2 Imma Kapinga,
 
<section> 2,3
 
<section> Key questions
 
<section> What is known already?
 
<section> ► Global estimates based on prevalence data from
 2000 to 2018 indicate that around a quarter of
 women who have ever been in a relationship have
 experienced physical and/or sexual violence from a
 current or former intimate partner.
 
<section> ► There is a growing body of evidence from ran-
 domised controlled trials that interventions for
 women that combine social empowerment or gen-
 der transformative interventions with economic
 strengthening are effective in preventing intimate
 partner violence.
 
<section> ► A previous trial of the MAISHA gender transforma-
 tive intervention, delivered to women in established
 microfinance groups, showed a positive impact on
 women’s past-­year experience of physical intimate
 partner violence and on their attitudes and beliefs
 about intimate partner violence.
 
<section> What are the new findings?
 
<section> ► In this second trial of the MAISHA intervention, wom-
 en living in the same neighbourhood were formed
 into groups to receive the intervention. There was
 a positive impact on women’s attitudes and beliefs
 about violence, and on their past-­year experience of
 emotional abuse from an intimate partner.
 
<section> ► Though there were anecdotal reports from interven-
 tion arm women of improvements in their relation-
 ships, the intervention did not lead to measurable
 reductions in their past-­year experiences of physical
 or sexual intimate partner violence.
 
<section> attitudes and beliefs condoning IPV, but was not
 to reduce physical or sexual IPV.
 
<section> registration number NCT02592252. 
<section> Key questions
 
<section> What do the new findings imply?
 
<section> ► This trial, combined with the first MAISHA trial, provides evidence
 that while a gender transformative intervention alone may not be
 sufficient to reduce physical or sexual intimate partner violence,
 the same intervention in the context of economic strengthening of
 women is effective in reducing physical violence.
 
<section> ► These findings add to mounting evidence that combining gender
 transformative interventions with economic strengthening pro-
 grammes has a positive impact on intimate partner violence.
 
<section> INTRODUCTION
 Violence against women has been described by WHO as a
 ‘global public health problem of epidemic proportions’.
 The most common form of violence against women is
 intimate partner violence (IPV) with the most recent
 estimates from population surveys indicating that, world-
 wide, around a quarter of women have experienced phys-
 ical and/or sexual violence from an intimate partner in
 their lifetime. 2 The negative impacts of IPV on physical
 and mental health are considerable for women and their
 families. 
<section> 1 3–5
 There is a growing body of rigorous evidence demon-
 strating that IPV is preventable. 6 7 Much of this research
 has been conducted in sub-­ Saharan Africa, 8 which is
 among the world regions with the highest rates of IPV.
 One of the first randomised controlled trials (RCTs)
 was the Intervention with Microfinance for AIDS and
 Gender Equity (IMAGE) trial, implemented in rural
 South Africa. 10 The intervention combined group-­based
 microfinance with a participatory gender and HIV
 training programme. In a cluster RCT IMAGE was shown
 to reduce women’s past year experience of physical and/
 or sexual IPV by 55% over a 2-­year period. In addition,
 levels of household poverty were significantly reduced,
 and participants were more empowered as evidenced by
 greater self-­confidence, autonomy in decision making,
 and increased ability to challenge gender norms when
 compared with women in the control population.
 Population surveys have revealed high levels of IPV
 against women in Tanzania, with almost 30% of ever-­
 partnered women having experienced physical and/
 or sexual IPV in the year prior to the survey. 11 Recent
 estimates from WHO indicate that violence remains high
 in Tanzania: 38% (95% uncertainty interval: 28%–50%)
 of ever-­married or partnered women aged 15–49 years
 have experienced physical and/or sexual IPV in their
 lifetime, and 24% (95% uncertainty interval: 16%–35%)
 have experienced it in the past 12 months. 2 Effective
 prevention interventions are urgently needed to address
 this public health crisis. Because the IMAGE model was
 a combined microfinance-­ training intervention, it was
 difficult to know the extent to which the observed effect
 on IPV was attributable to the different components of
 the intervention. Inspired by the IMAGE study, we aimed
 to better understand the relative and combined effects
 of economic and social empowerment interventions in
 Tanzania on women’s experience of IPV. We previously
 reported the results of a trial investigating the effect of
 the MAISHA social empowerment group-­based interven-
 tion on experiences of IPV among women taking part in
 a microfinance loan scheme. We found that the interven-
 tion was associated with a reduction in reported physical
 or sexual IPV, although the effect was greater for physical
 IPV. 12 In this second separate trial, we assessed the effect
 of the same intervention on experiences of IPV among
 women living in the same neighbourhood who were not
 engaged in a formal microfinance loan scheme.
 
<section> METHODS
 
<section> Trial design
 
<section> We conducted a cluster RCT in Mwanza city, north-­
 western Tanzania in close collaboration with local commu-
 nity leaders. The background, design and methods are
 described in detail elsewhere. 13 The trial team worked
 with community leaders to identify suitable neighbour-
 hoods across the city in which to form groups of women
 who would be eligible to participate in the trial. Once a
 potential neighbourhood had been identified, MAISHA
 team members worked with local leaders to identify and
 visit households in the neighbourhood in order to invite
 potentially eligible women to attend information meet-
 ings. Women who were interested in taking part were
 invited to attend subsequent meetings to obtain detailed
 information about the trial, including the overall aim
 and objectives, eligibility criteria and trial procedures.
 Women were eligible for inclusion if they were aged
 20–50 years, resident in Mwanza for 2 years or more, not
 a member of formal microfinance loan group scheme
 in the past 12 months, and were fluent in Swahili. We
 excluded women who were formally employed so the
 population would be more comparable with the previous
 MAISHA CRT01 trial population, 12 and be available to
 attend intervention sessions. Research staff met with
 potentially eligible women to go through the participant
 information sheet explaining the purpose of the trial and
 the procedures. Women who demonstrated comprehen-
 sion of the trial procedures and agreed to take part were
 invited to sign the consent form (online supplemental
 material 1). Within each neighbourhood, we aimed to
 recruit around 15–20 women.
 
<section> Safety
 
<section> The trial was designed following WHO recommenda-
 tions on researching violence against women. 14 To ensure
 women’s safety, trained staff interviewed participants
 in private, and maintained regular contact with them
 throughout the trial. A referral system was established
 to assist women who reported experiencing violence to
 access appropriate services and support. Information
 about local support services was provided to all partici-
 pants irrespective of whether they reported experiencing
 violence. 
<section> Randomisation and masking
 Over 18 months, women in 66 neighbourhoods were
 recruited and the neighbourhood clusters then
 randomised in blocks of six as they were enrolled into
 the trial. For each block of six neighbourhood clusters,
 community randomisation ceremonies were conducted
 as a two-­stage process that was both participatory and
 transparent involving the research team and represent-
 atives nominated by members from each of the neigh-
 bourhood clusters to be randomised. First, representa-
 tives from each of the six clusters were randomly divided
 equally into two sets (A and B). This was done by each
 representative drawing a folded sheet of paper (with A or
 B written on it) from a box. Second, one of the represent-
 atives from either A or B was asked to call (heads or tails)
 for her set to be allocated to immediate intervention. A
 trial team member then tossed a coin to randomly allo-
 cate each set of three clusters to either the intervention
 or to control (to receive the intervention after the trial).
 It was not possible to mask participants or the research
 team involved in day-­to-­day operations and delivery of
 the intervention.
 
<section> Procedures
 
<section> The trial timeline is outlined in figure 1. Prior to rando-
 misation, we conducted a face-­to-­face interview with each
 participant using a structured questionnaire adapted
 from the WHO Violence Against Women instrument,
 which has also been widely used in Demographic and
 Health Surveys and other IPV prevention interven-
 tion trials. 10 15 16 The questionnaire was translated into
 Swahili (the national language) and independently back-­
 translated into English for validation. Interviews were
 conducted in private by female interviewers trained in
 interviewing techniques, gender issues, violence and
 ethical issues related to research on IPV.
 Women in neighbourhoods allocated to the inter-
 vention arm participated as a group in the 10-­session
 MAISHA intervention following the Wanawake na Maisha
 (which means ‘women and life’ in Swahili) curriculum,
 which was developed by EngenderHealth (an inter-
 national non-­ profit organisation focussing on gender
 equity and reproductive health—www.​ engenderhealth.​
 org) in collaboration with the research team, drawing
 on other published curricula, including Sisters for Life
 from IMAGE. The MAISHA intervention was designed to
 be participatory and reflective, and aimed to empower
 women, prevent IPV, and promote healthy relationships
 by: increasing knowledge and awareness (eg, of the
 consequences of normative attitudes to gender and IPV);
 developing relationship skills (eg, communication and
 conflict resolution); and improving group dynamics and
 stability (eg, increased peer support and social capital).
 The 10-­ session MAISHA intervention (outlined in
 figure 2) was delivered to the 33 intervention arm groups
 on alternate weeks over a 20-­week period. Each session
 lasted between 1.5 and 2 hours. Venues were selected
 to be convenient to participants, with sessions generally
 taking place at the group leader’s house or in a quiet area
 of a local café or guesthouse. Sessions were delivered by
 trained female facilitators, following the Wanawake Na
 Maisha curriculum which provides detailed guidance for
 each session. Facilitators were recruited and trained by the
 research team and EngenderHealth, allowing them time
 to become very familiar with the curriculum materials
 and to practise and develop effective facilitation skills.
 Refresher training was provided by EngenderHealth
 during the trial. Intervention delivery was monitored by
 the trial coordinator and senior research team members.
 Curriculum facilitators maintained session attendance
 registers to monitor attendance and ensure that sessions
 were attended by intervention arm women only, thereby
 minimising the potential for contamination.
 The curriculum facilitators had no contact with women
 in neighbourhoods allocated to the control arm. However,
 to minimise the risk of attrition bias, the research team
 maintained regular contact with both intervention and
 control arm women during the 2-­year period between
 the end of the intervention and assessment of outcomes.
 The impact of the intervention was assessed through
 interviews conducted 29 months postrandomisation
 with both trial arms (24 months after groups completed
 intervention activities). Interviews were conducted face-­
 to-­ face using the same structured questionnaire as at
 baseline, and following the same procedures. Wanawake
 Na Maisha curriculum facilitators were not involved in
 collection of baseline data or trial outcome assessments.
 
<section> Outcomes
 
<section> The primary outcomes were women’s reports of past
 year physical IPV and past-­year sexual IPV. The original
 primary outcome was a composite of past year physical
 and sexual IPV. However, this was revised in light of the
 results of MAISHA CRT01 12 and evidence from other
 violence prevention trials 15 16 indicating limited impact
 on sexual IPV, a pattern that was hypothesised from the
 outset of the SASA! trial. 17 It was decided, therefore, that
 reported past year experience of physical IPV and sexual
 IPV should be evaluated as separate primary outcomes
 at 29 months postrandomisation (24 months postint-
 ervention). A favourable opinion for this amendment
 was received from the ethics committee before the end
 of follow-­ up and prior to analysis of data. Secondary
 outcomes were emotional abuse, three measures of IPV
 related attitudes and beliefs, and past year disclosure of
 IPV among women who reported past year experience of
 physical/sexual IPV. Details of questionnaire items used
 to construct the outcomes are presented in Table 1.
 
<section> Sample size
 
<section> It was calculated that a sample size of 33 neighbourhood
 clusters per trial arm with an average of 20 participants
 per cluster (allowing for 10% loss to follow-­up) would
 provide 80% power to detect a reduction of 33% in past
 year IPV, and 90% power to detect a reduction of 38%,
 assuming an intracluster correlation (ICC) of 0.035. Even timeline. Trial 1 Figure 
<section> curriculum.
 Maisha
 Na
 intervention—Wanawake
 
<section> MAISHA
 
<section> 2
 Figure 
<insert> Outcome Questions
 Physical IPV (primary)
 (yes/no)
 Reported that her current or any other partner has done at least one of the following things
 to her in the past 12 months:
 ► ► Slapped her or thrown something at her that could hurt her.
 ► ► Pushed her or shoved her or pulled her hair.
 ► ► Hit her with his fist or something else that could hurt her.
 ► ► Kicked her, dragged her or beat her up.
 ► ► Choked or burnt her on purpose.
 ► ► Threatened to use or actually used a gun, knife or other weapon against her.
 Sexual IPV (primary)
 (yes/no)
 Reported that at least one of the following things has happened to her in the past
 months:
 ► ► Current or any other partner forced her to have sexual intercourse by threatening her,
 holding her down or hurting her in some way.
 ► ► She had sexual intercourse when she did not want to because she was afraid that her
 partner would hurt her or someone she cared about if she refused.
 ► ► She had sexual intercourse when she did not want to because she was afraid that her
 partner would leave her or take another girlfriend if she refused.
 Emotional abuse*
 (yes/no)
 Reported that her current or any other partner has done at least one of the following things
 to her in the past 12 months:
 ► ► Insulted her or made her feel bad about herself
 ► ► Belittled or humiliated her in front of other people.
 ► ► Done things to scare or humiliate her on purpose (eg, by the way he looked at her, by
 yelling and smashing things).
 ► ► Verbally threatened to hurt her or someone she cares about.
 Disclosure of IPV (among women Reported that she has told someone within the past 12 months about her partner’s
 who physical and/or sexual IPV behaviour (violence/abuse) towards her.
 in the past 12 months)
 (yes/no)
 Attitudes accepting of IPV
 (yes/no)
 Reported that she ‘strongly agrees’ or ‘agrees’ that a man has good reason to hit his wife in
 at least one of the following scenarios:
 ► ► She does not complete her household work to his satisfaction.
 ► ► She disobeys him.
 ► ► She refuses to have sexual intercourse with him.
 ► ► She protests because he has other girlfriends.
 ► ► He suspects that she is unfaithful in marriage.
 ► ► He finds out that she has been unfaithful in marriage.
 Believes a woman should Reported that she ‘strongly agrees’ or ‘agrees’ with the statement:
 tolerate violence in order to keep ‘A woman should tolerate violence in order to keep her family together’
 her family together
 Believes IPV is a private matter Reported that she ‘strongly agrees’ or ‘agrees’ with the statement:
 ‘Violence between husband and wife is a private matter and others should not intervene.’
 *High intensity emotional abuse defined as having experienced at least one of the items many times in the past 12 months.
 IPV, intimate partner violence.
 Table 1 Questions used to construct primary and secondary outcomes assessed at 29 months postrandomisation (24
 months postintervention) 
<iend>

 with an ICC of 0.05, the trial would have 80% power to
 detect a reduction in past year physical IPV of 35%.
 
<section> Data management and statistical analyses
 All data collected at baseline and at follow-­ up were
 recorded directly onto tablet computers with in-­ built
 checks to minimise missing or erroneous data. At the
 end of each day, data were uploaded from the tablet
 computers to a secure database and checked by the data
 manager. Data queries were sent to the field team leader
 to be resolved with the data collectors. Data analysis
 was performed using STATA V.16 following a prespeci-
 fied analysis plan (online supplemental material 1), by
 analysts who were blind to cluster allocation. The primary
 analysis was conducted following the intention-­to-­treat
 (ITT) principle, whereby participants were analysed
 according to the trial arm to which they were randomly
 allocated, irrespective of whether or not they participated
 in the intervention (or control) activities. All participants 
<section> who provided both baseline and follow-­ up data were
 included in the analysis, to allow for adjustment of base-
 line characteristics. The crude intervention effect, odds
 ratio (OR) with 95% CI, for each outcome was estimated
 using a logistic regression model with random intercepts
 for neighbourhood cluster (unit of randomisation) to
 account for the clustered nature of the data. Adjusted
 ORs (aORs) were estimated in the same way, except the
 models included terms for age (modelled as a linear
 effect), baseline measure of the respective outcome, and
 education (secondary/higher vs primary/none).
 In a real-­world setting, it is inevitable that participants
 will not be able to attend every session. As for the previous
 MAISHA trial, we considered attendance at seven or
 more sessions would constitute a good “dose” of the
 intervention. We, therefore, performed a per-­protocol
 analysis in which we restricted the analysis to interven-
 tion arm women who attended seven or more interven-
 tion sessions, and propensity score matched control arm
 women. Dose response effects on attitudinal outcomes
 were further explored by adding number of interven-
 tion sessions (as a linear term) to the logistic regression
 model used for the primary analysis.
 We also conducted several sensitivity analyses to assess
 the robustness of the primary analysis: (1) adding a
 random intercepts term for interviewer to control for
 possible heterogeneity in outcome reporting between
 interviewers; and (2) including all participants who
 completed the baseline questionnaire, using multiple
 imputation to simulate missing endline data. Since
 the trial commenced, more sophisticated measures of
 emotional/psychological abuse have been proposed. We,
 therefore, conducted a sensitivity analysis with a measure
 of ‘high intensity psychological abuse’ 18 in addition to
 the original prespecified measure (table 1).
 
<section> Changes to the protocol
 There were three amendments to the trial protocol
 described in detail elsewhere. 13 Briefly, these were: (1)
 outcome assessments, originally planned at 17 months
 postrandomisation (12 months postintervention), were
 extended to 29 months postrandomisation (24 months
 postintervention) to allow comparability with the IMAGE
 trial results; (2) the original trial design was to invite male
 partners of trial participants to participate in a similar
 intervention designed for men. In light of poor accrual
 and poor participation in the intervention by enrolled
 men, the trial design was revised to include only women;
 and (3) the primary outcome was changed as previously
 described.
 
<section> Participant and public involvement
 The design of the MAISHA study was inspired by IMAGE
 and aimed to address questions raised by the trial in
 South Africa. Although there was not specific public
 involvement in development of the research question
 and outcomes, discussions were held with local commu-
 nity leaders and representatives about the purpose of the
 study. Throughout the trial, the research team worked
 in collaboration with local community leaders to identify
 neighbourhoods across the city in which to form groups.
 Within each neighbourhood, the research team worked
 closely with local leaders to identify and invite women to
 local community information meetings about the study.
 The process of randomisation was a participatory process
 that involved participant representatives to ensure trans-
 parency in allocation of neighbourhoods to each arm of
 the trial.
 Community advisory committees were established
 comprising local leaders, religious leaders, trial partici-
 pants and other relevant stakeholders. These commit-
 tees met regularly to facilitate effective communication
 between the research team and study communities, and
 to ensure that any concerns from members of the commu-
 nity were addressed promptly. The COVID-19 pandemic
 has impacted on dissemination activities, however the
 MAISHA team continues to work with the community
 advisory committees on plans to safely disseminate the
 trial results to participants and stakeholders in Tanzania.
 
<section> RESULTS
 
<section> Between September 2015 and February 2017, we identi-
 fied 81 neighbourhoods and sought approval from local
 leaders to conduct research activities. Research activities
 were discontinued in 15 neighbourhoods when it became
 apparent that high numbers of women were members
 of formal microfinance loan schemes (n=12 neighbour-
 hoods) or there were insufficient numbers of women who
 wished to take part (n=3 neighbourhoods). Across the
 remaining 66 neighbourhoods, 1912 women attended
 the information meetings. Of these, 1478 expressed
 interest in participating and were assessed for eligibility,
 of whom 1265 were ultimately enrolled (figure 3). A
 baseline interview was completed prior to randomisation
 by 1248 (99%) women. Between May 2018 and August
 2019, 551 (88%) women in the intervention arm and
 575 (90%) women in the control arm also completed the
 follow-­up interview and were included in the ITT analysis
 (figure 3). There was no difference in baseline character-
 istics between women included in the ITT and those lost
 to follow-­up.
 Table 2A shows the baseline characteristics of partici-
 pants by trial arm. The mean age of women was similar
 in both arms, around 33 years. Almost all participants
 (n=1123, 99.8%) reported having had a partner (regular
 or casual) at some point in their lives, with most married/
 living as married at baseline (80%–81%). The two arms
 were broadly similar, although there was a slight differ-
 ence in education, with control arm women more likely
 to have attended secondary or higher education (22% vs
 19%). In addition, control arm women reported higher
 median monthly income compared with intervention
 arm women (table 2A). Table 2B shows participants’ base-
 line reports of IPV and attitudes by trial arm. At baseline,
 control arm women were more likely to have reported 
<section> Figure 3 Trial profile. ITT, intention-­to-­treat.
 
<section> past year sexual IPV (23% vs 19%) but were less likely to
 have attitudes accepting of IPV compared with interven-
 tion arm women (51% vs 58%)(table 2B). The ICC for
 baseline past year physical IPV was 0.0230 (SE 0.0211)
 and for past year sexual IPV 0.0001 (SE 0.0172).
 Of the 551 intervention women, 85% (n=466) partic-
 ipated in at least seven of the 10 intervention sessions.
 In Table 3A, we present the results of the ITT analyses.
 At follow-­ up, past year physical IPV was reported by
 21% of intervention arm women and 20% of control
 arm women. The aOR was 0.98 (95% CI 0.72 to 1.33,
 p=0.892). In addition, past year sexual IPV was reported
 by 20% of intervention arm women and 21% of control
 arm women. The aOR was 0.98 (95% CI 0.72 to 1.32,
 p=0.881). With respect to secondary outcomes, there
 was evidence of an impact on past year emotional abuse,
 which was reported by 39% of intervention arm women
 compared with 45% of control arm women (aOR 0.74,
 95% CI 0.56 to 0.98, p=0.035). Furthermore, there was
 also evidence of impact on attitudes accepting of IPV
 (aOR 0.49, 95% CI 0.36 to 0.66, p<0.001), the belief that
 a woman should tolerate violence in order to keep her
 family together (aOR 0.48, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.66, p<0.001),
 and the belief that IPV is private matter and others should
 not intervene (aOR 0.54, 95% CI 0.38 to 0.78, p=0.001).
 Among the women reporting past year physical or sexual
 IPV, results are suggestive of decrease in odds of disclo-
 sure of IPV in the intervention arm, however, the CI is
 wide, and inference is severely limited by the restricted
 sample size for this outcome (table 3A).
 Measures of effect were not affected by inclusion of a
 random intercepts term for interviewer online supple-
 mental table S1), or when multiple imputation was
 used to impute missing outcome data for participants
 who only completed the baseline questionnaire (online
 supplemental table S2). In contrast to when the prespec-
 ified measure of emotional abuse was used, there was
 less evidence of an impact on emotional abuse using the
 ‘high intensity’ measure (aOR 0.79, 95% CI 0.55 to 1.12).
 As with the ITT analysis, there was no impact on the
 primary outcomes when the analysis was restricted to
 women who participated in seven or more sessions and
 propensity scored matched controls (per-­protocol anal-
 ysis, Table 3B). While intervention impacts on the attitu-
 dinal outcomes were similar in this ‘high-­dose’ group to
 those observed in the ITT analysis, the effect on emotional
 abuse was slightly stronger in the high dose group (aOR
 of 0.65, 95% CI 0.48 to 0.87, p=0.004), (table 3B). We
 found no evidence of a dose response effect on attitu-
 dinal outcomes among intervention arm women who
 attended one or more sessions (online supplemental
 figures S1-3 and table S3).
 There were no reports that participation in the trial had
 led to new episodes of violence or worsening of ongoing
 violence and abuse. The trial team provided assistance
 to 43 women who wished to seek help and support for
 ongoing IPV and abuse.
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 
<section> In this trial, we found no evidence of an impact on either
 reported past year physical or sexual IPV among women
 who participated in the MAISHA intervention. There was,
 however, evidence of a reduction in past-­year emotional
 abuse, and intervention women were much less likely to
 express attitudes accepting of IPV, express beliefs that
 IPV is a private matter, or that a woman should tolerate
 IPV in order to keep her family together.
 The lack of an effect on past-­year physical IPV is in
 contrast to the findings of a previous trial we conducted
 evaluating the impact of the MAISHA social empower-
 ment intervention among women taking part in a formal
 microfinance scheme (MAISHA CRT01), where physical 
<insert> Intervention (N=551)
 Characteristic n (%)
 Control (N=575)
 n (%)
 Age (years) Mean (SD) (range) 33.2 (8.1) (20–50) 33.0 (8.0)(18–50)
 Marital status Married 445 (81%) 461 (80%)
   Divorced/separated 52 (9%) 62 (11%)
   Widowed 26 (5%) 26 (5%)
   Never married 28 (5%) 26 (5%)
 Partnered in past year   503 (91%) 527 (92%)
 Highest level of education completed None/incomplete primary 100 (18%) 114 (20%)
   Completed primary 344 (62%) 336 (58%)
   Attended secondary/higher 107 (19%) 125 (22%)
 Partner’s age (years) Mean (SD) (range) 39.6 (9.6)(20–77) 39.4 (9.5)(22–68)
 Partner’s education None/incomplete primary 45 (8%) 36 (6%)
   Completed primary 332 (60%) 331 (58%)
   Attended secondary or
 higher
 153 (28%) 178 (31%)
   Unknown 19 (3%) 29 (5%)
 No of children
 (<18 years)
 None 24 (4%) 29 (5%)
   1–2 186 (34%) 234 (41%)
   3–4 225 (41%) 213 (37%)
   5+ 116 (21%) 99 (17%)
 Household experienced financial hardship in past year 385 (65%) 344 (60%)
 Respondent worked for money during past 12 months 443 (80%) 461 (80%)
 Respondent’s monthly income (Tanzanian shillings) Median
 (IQR)
 88 000*
 (55 000 to 154 000)
 110 000†
 (55 000 to 195 000)
 *Equivalent to approximately US$38 (US$24 to US$66).
 †Equivalent to US$47 (US$24 to US$84).
 Table 2A Baseline characteristics of participants included in the intention to treat analysis, by trial arm 
<iend>

 
<insert> Table 2B Baseline reports of intimate partner violence, and attitudes and beliefs among ever-­partnered participants included
 in the intention-­to-­treat analysis, by trial arm
 Intervention (N=549)*
 n (%)
 Control (N=574)
 n (%)
  Ever 320 (58%) 325 (57%)
  Past year 141 (26%) 140 (24%)
  Ever 215 (39%) 239 (42%)
  Past year 105 (19%) 130 (23%)
  Ever 407 (74%) 406 (71%)
  Past year 249 (45%) 252 (44%)
 Type of intimate partner violence/abuse
 Physical
 Sexual
 Emotional
 Disclosed violence in past year (among those experiencing physical/sexual IPV 138/187 (74%)
 in past year)
 147/203 (72%)
 Attitude/belief (N=551) (N=575)
 Attitudes accepting of IPV 319 (58%) 296 (51%)
 Believes a woman should tolerate violence in order to keep her family together 496 (90%) 497 (86%)
 Believes IPV is a private matter and others should not intervene 64 (12%) 69 (12%)
 *Three women (intervention n=2, control n=1) reported at baseline never being partnered, so excluded from the analysis.
 IPV, intimate partner violence. 
<iend>
 
<insert> Type of intimate partner violence/abuse
 Intervention
 (n=550)*
 N (%)
 Control
 (n=575)
 N (%)
 Physical (primary) 113 (21%)
 Sexual (primary)
 Crude OR (95% CI) p
 value
 Adjusted OR
 (95% CI) p value
 117 (20%)  1.1 (0.75 to 1.36)
  0.934
 0.98 (0.72 to 1.33)
 0.892
 109 (20%) 121 (21%) 0.93 (0.69 to 1.26)
 0.648
 0.98 (0.72 to 1.32)
 0.881
 Emotional 216 (39%) 259 (45%) 0.79 (0.61 to 1.03)
 0.079
 0.74 (0.56 to 0.98)
 0.035
   n=170 n=177    
 Disclosed IPV in past year (among those
 experiencing physical/sexual IPV in past year)
 118 (69%) 135 (76%) 0.71 (0.44 to 1.14)
 0.151
 0.75 (0.46 to 1.21)
 0.239
 Attitude/belief (n=551) (n=575)    
 Attitudes accepting of IPV 282 (51%) 373 (65%) 0.56 (0.42 to 0.74)
 <0.001
 0.49 (0.36 to 0.66)
 <0.001
 Believes a woman should tolerate violence in
 order to keep her family together
 82 (15%) 148 (26%) 0.50 (0.37 to 0.69)
 <0.001
 0.48 (0.34 to 0.66)
 <0.001
 Believes IPV is a private matter and others should
 not intervene
 58 (11%) 100 (17%) 0.56 (0.39 to 0.81)
 0.002
 0.54 (0.38 to 0.78)
 0.001
 *One woman reported never being partnered so excluded from the analysis.
 IPV, intimate partner violence.
 Table 3A Intention-­to-­treat analysis of intervention impact on primary and secondary outcomes reported 29 months
 postrandomisation among ever partnered women 
<iend>

 
<insert> Table 3B Intervention impacts on primary and secondary outcomes among those attending seven or more intervention
 sessions, compared with controls matched on propensity for high intervention attendance*
 Adjusted OR‡
 Crude OR† (95% CI) (95% CI)
 Type of intimate partner violence/abuse P value P value
 Intervention
 (n=464)
 N (%)
 Control (n=464)
 N (%)
 Physical 95 (20%) 98 (21%) 0.96 (0.70 to 1.32)
 0.808
 0.96 (0.69 to 1.34)
 0.812
 Sexual 91 (20%) 98 (21%) 0.92 (0.65 to 1.29)
 0.616
 0.97 (0.70 to 1.36)
 0.873
 Emotional 171 (37%) 214 (46%) 0.68 (0.51 to 0.90)
 0.008
 0.65 (0.48 to 0.87)
 0.004
 109/145 (75%) 0.76 (0.45 to 1.29)
 0.305
 0.80 (0.47 to 1.38)
 0.425
    
 Disclosed violence in past year (among those
 experiencing physical/sexual IPV in past year)
 99/142 (70%)
 Attitude/belief
 Attitudes accepting of IPV 235 (51%) 296 (64%) 0.57 (0.42 to 0.78)
 <0.001
 0.51 (0.37 to 0.71)
 <0.001
 Believes a woman should tolerate violence in
 order to keep her family together
 69 (15%) 123 (27%) 0.48 (0.34 to 0.69)
 <0.001
 0.47 (0.33 to 0.67)
 <0.001
 Believes IPV is a private matter and others should
 not intervene
 48 (10%) 84 (18%) 0.52 (0.35 to 0.78)
 0.001
 0.52 (0.35 to 0.77)
 0.001
 *Propensity score predicted based on a logistic regression model fitted to women in the intervention arm, with 7+ sessions as the
 dependent variable and independent variables comprising baseline measures of cluster size, age, religion, marital status, highest level
 of education attended, number of children, experience of sexual and/or physical IPV (never/ ever but not past yr/ past year), past year
 experience of controlling behaviour, and poor mental health.
 †Crude OR point and interval estimates and p value are from a logistic regression with cluster-­level random intercepts but no
 adjustment for baseline covariates.
 ‡Adjusted OR point and interval estimates and p-­value are from a logistic regression with cluster-­level random intercepts and
 adjustment for baseline measure of outcome (Y/N/NA), secondary or higher education (Y/N) and age (linear).
 IPV, intimate partner violence. 
<iend>

 
<section> IPV was reduced by around a third. 12 There are several
 potential reasons for these contrasting findings.
 First, important differences in the underlying risk
 factors for IPV of the two trial populations could explain
 the different intervention effects observed. Women
 (and their partners) in the current trial were on average
 younger than those in the previous trial (women’s mean
 age at baseline 33.1 years, (SD 8.1 years) vs 39.6 years, 
<section> (9.5 years)), and reported higher levels of past year phys-
 ical and/or sexual IPV at baseline (35% vs 26%). Another
 key difference between the two populations is level of
 education, which is well-­recognised as a risk factor for
 IPV. 19 Overall, participants in the current trial were less
 educated with 19% having received no education or
 incomplete primary education compared with 14% of
 CRT01 participants. 12 Having less formal education does
 not seem to have impacted on women’s participation in
 the intervention; the facilitators reported that women
 were very engaged and interactive during the sessions.
 However, they may have faced more challenges in imple-
 menting changes at home to reduce violence.
 Second, participants in the previous trial were recruited
 and participated in the MAISHA intervention in their pre-­
 established microfinance groups. It is likely, therefore, that
 they had already developed strong social ties with their fellow
 group members. Evidence suggests that social capital, such
 as that gained through group membership, may provide
 women with some forms of protection, as well as the confi-
 dence to address physical IPV. 20 It is possible that this support
 combined with a slightly higher level of formal education,
 meant that these women were already further along a trajec-
 tory of empowerment at the outset of the trial, that is, thinking
 about and challenging social norms that promote gender
 inequalities. 21 Conversely, for the current trial, women
 living in the same neighbourhood were formed into groups
 specifically for the purpose of the intervention, and may not
 have had pre-­existing social ties with other group members.
 Perhaps these women needed more time to bond as a group
 and develop social trust and solidarity before participating in
 the MAISHA intervention. Even so, we are aware that there
 were tensions within some of the microfinance groups over
 the collective responsibility for individual debt, which some-
 times impacted negatively on group cohesiveness.
 Third, in addition to being less educated than women
 in the previous trial, other indicators suggest that women
 in the current trial experienced greater levels of poverty.
 They were more likely to report household economic hard-
 ship, as measured by difficulty in covering basic household
 needs such as food and medicine (62% vs 47%). The rela-
 tionship between poverty and women’s experience of IPV is
 complex and the evidence suggests multiple ways in which
 poverty drives IPV both directly and indirectly. 19 Indirectly,
 growing up in poverty increases the likelihood of experi-
 encing recognised risk factors for IPV, including poorer
 educational outcomes, and adverse childhood experi-
 ences such as physical, sexual and emotional abuse, and
 neglect. 22 23 More directly, high levels of stress in households
 struggling to manage scarce resources, can lead to conflict
 and violence. 24 25 A number of studies have demonstrated
 associations between food insecurity (an indicator of acute
 poverty) and women’s experience of IPV. 19 23 26 Any effects
 of the MAISHA intervention may not have been sufficient to
 counteract these additional stressors present in the current
 trial.
 Fourth, as well as overall levels of household poverty,
 women’s lack of access to and control over economic
 resources is also a driver of IPV risk, limiting women’s power
 within relationships as well as their ability to leave abusive
 relationships. Women in the current trial were not partici-
 pating in formal microfinance, were less likely than those in
 the previous trial to report personally earning money (80% vs
 97%), and where they did so their income was lower (median
 of 110 000 vs 220 000 Tanzanian shillings per month). Starting
 from a point of greater financial independence from their
 male partners, the MAISHA intervention may have enabled
 women in the previous trial to enact change within their rela-
 tionships. For women in the current trial, however, greater
 economic dependence on male partners might have limited
 the extent to which they were able to translate changes in
 personal ‘empowerment’ into relationship-­level change.
 Given the ways in which poverty increases women’s
 vulnerability to IPV, there has been considerable research
 focused on economic interventions to prevent women’s
 experience of IPV. 7 Much of the research addresses whether
 economic interventions alone are sufficient to reduce IPV,
 or whether they should be delivered in combination with
 social empowerment or gender transformative interven-
 tions. The evidence indicates that programmes combining
 economic strengthening with social empowerment for
 women tend to lead to positive outcomes, 7 27 with cash
 transfer interventions more consistently linked to reduc-
 tions in IPV than microfinance interventions for which the
 evidence is more mixed. 28 The related but conceptually
 opposite question of whether social empowerment inter-
 ventions alone can work in the absence of economic inter-
 ventions, has received less attention. This trial suggests that
 a social empowerment intervention alone for women is not
 sufficient to reduce IPV. However, we cannot comment on
 whether these results can be generalised to other women
 in Tanzania. For example, women in higher socioeco-
 nomic groups.
 It is possible that we might have seen an intervention
 effect on physical and sexual violence if male partners
 had also participated in the intervention, as originally
 planned. There is good evidence that couples’ interven-
 tions, which are well designed and well implemented,
 are effective in reducing IPV against women. 7 Such inter-
 ventions require careful consideration of the population
 being targeted, including understanding how mascu-
 linities operate and are related to IPV perpetration in
 specific contexts.
 The MAISHA intervention had a considerable impact
 on women’s attitudes and beliefs about violence. Although
 we cannot exclude the possibility of social desirability bias,
 it is worth noting anecdotal evidence from the field team
 suggesting that women seemed more confident about chal-
 lenging violence in their communities.
 Similar to the previous MAISHA trial and other trials,
 there was no effect on sexual IPV in this trial. We did not
 assess women’s acceptance of sexual IPV, however, social
 norms supporting sexual entitlement of men are deeply
 entrenched in Tanzania. The lack of impact on sexual IPV in
 both MAISHA trials indicates the need to engage more with
 men. Although they did not refer to sexual IPV explicitly, 
<section> the trial participants highlighted the need to include men in
 violence prevention interventions.
 In contrast to the previous trial there was a reduction in
 reports of emotional abuse by intervention arm women
 compared with control arm women. This is an encour-
 aging finding given the link between mental ill health and
 emotional abuse. 29 The overall prevalence of emotional
 abuse was high in both MAISHA trial populations; however,
 it is not clear why there was an impact of the intervention on
 this form of abuse in the current trial but not in the previous
 trial. Secondary analyses are underway to explore potential
 explanations for the different intervention effects in the two
 trials, alongside questions of how mechanisms of change
 may have differed in the two trials. These exploratory anal-
 yses augmented by rich data from the longitudinal qualita-
 tive study of a subsample of trial participants, 21 will provide
 valuable insights into these results, and provide an oppor-
 tunity to better understand the potential for the MAISHA
 intervention to be transferred and adapted to other settings.
 We observed a slightly stronger effect on emotional abuse
 when we restricted the analysis to women who attended
 seven or more sessions; however, we did not observe any
 strengthened impact on other outcomes in this ‘high-­dose’
 group. This is perhaps unsurprising given the high atten-
 dance at sessions, which of itself is encouraging and suggests
 the MAISHA intervention is acceptable to women.
 There are some limitations. Women who participated
 in the trial are among the poorest in Mwanza city, and
 the results are possibly not generalisable to women who
 are more economically advantaged. Reporting bias is a
 concern, particularly as under-­reporting of IPV is common.
 It is possible that exposure to the intervention might have
 increased sensitisation of women to IPV leading to increased
 reports of violence among women in the intervention arm,
 and thereby an underestimate of the effect size. Given the
 nature of the intervention, it was not possible to mask the
 research team to group allocation. To reduce the risk of
 reporting bias, we assessed outcomes using questions that
 are standardised and widely used in violence research 11 with
 face-­to-­face interviews conducted by interviewers who had
 received extensive training and had not been involved in
 implementation of the intervention.
 The trial has many strengths. Randomisation of groups
 ensured that there was no bias in programme placement.
 Women were enrolled from a large number of neigh-
 bourhoods across Mwanza city ensuring that the trial was
 adequately powered. Engagement with the intervention was
 very good and most participants attended at least seven of
 the 10 sessions, suggesting that the intervention is acceptable
 to women. Retention rates were high for both arms (88%
 intervention arm vs 90% control). Although it is possible that
 the women lost to follow-­up differed from those included in
 the analysis, baseline comparisons with the ITT population
 do not support this suggestion. Furthermore, the impact of
 the intervention remained much the same when those lost
 to follow-­up were included in the outcomes analysis using
 multiple imputation. Data were analysed following the ITT
 principle and a pre-­specified analysis plan, with data analysts
 blinded to trial allocation. Baseline data enabled us to adjust
 for baseline imbalances between the trial arms (according to
 the pre-­specified analysis plan). The mixed-­methods design
 of the trial, utilising quantitative and qualitative approaches,
 will allow us to gain a better understanding of the effect of
 the intervention, and how it is experienced by participants.
 Data from the complementary longitudinal qualitative study
 will be invaluable in exploring women’s experiences of the
 intervention and format, processes of change, and potential
 reasons for its impact or lack of impact on different forms of
 violence and abuse.
 In summary, IPV is a major problem globally. This trial is
 an important addition to the body of evidence on what works
 to prevent violence. 6 7 It has shown that although this gender
 transformative intervention did have a considerable impact
 on attitudes and beliefs about violence, and on emotional
 abuse experienced by women, it was not sufficient to reduce
 physical or sexual IPV. Current evidence indicates positive
 outcomes when social empowerment or gender transfor-
 mative interventions are combined with economic strength-
 ening for women. 7 27 However, it is also crucial to engage men
 in strategies to prevent all forms of violence against women,
 and there is accumulating evidence that couples’ interven-
 tions, focussing on transforming gender relations within the
 couple, are also effective in reducing women’s experiences
 of IPV.
 
<section> Author affiliations
 Global Health and Development, Faculty of Public Health and Policy, London School
 of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK
 Mwanza Intervention Trials Unit, National Institute for Medical Research Mwanza
 
<section> Research Centre, Mwanza, Tanzania
 Sexual and Reproductive Health, National Institute for Medical Research Mwanza
 Research Centre, Mwanza, Mwanza, Tanzania
 Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health,
 London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK
 
<section> Acknowledgements First and foremost, we wish to thank all study participants
 for their time and commitment to the trial. We are also grateful to the MAISHA
 research team for their contribution and tireless dedication to implementing the
 trial in Tanzania, and to the administration teams at MITU and LSHTM for their
 support. We dedicate this paper to our colleague Euphrasia Mwakalikamo, a highly
 valued member of the MAISHA field team, who sadly died in April 2020.
 
<section> Contributors SH provided methodological input, coordinated the trial and
 managed the trial teams with assistance from IK, and wrote the first draft of the
 trial report. TA did the statistical analysis and cowrote the first draft of the trial
 report. GM contributed to the trial design and provided methodological input into
 the qualitative study. CHH provided methodological input and statistical support.
 GJM and FM led the field team responsible for recruitment of participants and
 data collection. RH set up and managed the data management systems. CW
 conceived the idea and design of the trial and provided methodological input. SL
 contributed to the trial design and provided methodological input and oversight of
 the qualitative study. SK contributed to the trial design, provided methodological
 input and oversight of the trial. All authors contributed to interpreting the data and
 writing the manuscript.
 
<section> Funding The MAISHA study was funded by a donor who wishes to remain
 anonymous and the STRIVE Consortium funded by UK Aid from the Department for
 International Development.
 
<section> Competing interests Following initiation of the trial, CW was seconded to
 the UK Government Department for International Development as their chief
 scientific advisor. Her ongoing role in this trial is in her academic capacity at
 LSHTM.
 
<section> Patient consent for publication Not required. 
<section> Ethics approval The trial was approved by the Tanzanian National Health Research
 Ethics Committee of the National Institute for Medical Research (Ref: NIMR/HQ/R.8a/
 Vol. IX/1512), and the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine research ethics
 committee (LSHTM, Ref: 11642). It was implemented by the Mwanza Intervention
 Trials Unit (MITU), the Tanzania National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR) and
 LSHTM in close collaboration with local leaders and members of the communities
 where the trial was conducted.
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
 
<section> Data availability statement Data are available on request. Study data in this
 paper, including anonymised individual participant data, will be made available
 upon publication to members of the scientific and medical community for
 non-­commercial use only. Request should be made to the corresponding author.
 Data will be stored in Data Compass, the London School of Hygiene and Tropical
 Medicine’s digital data repository.
 
<section> Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has
 not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been
 peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those
 of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and
 responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content
 includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability
 of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines,
 terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error
 and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
 Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which
 permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially,
 and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
 properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the
 use is non-­commercial. See: http:// c reativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by-​nc/​4.​0/.
 
<section> ORCID iDs
 
<section> Tanya Abramsky http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​0271-​8492
 Shelley Lees http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0003-​0062-​7930
 
<section> REFERENCES
 1 World Health Organization. Global and regional estimates of violence
 against women: prevalence and health effects of intimate partner
 violence and non-­partner sexual violence, 2013. Available: https://
 www.​who.​int/​publications/​i/​item/​9789241564625 [Accessed 29 Mar
 2021].
 2 World Health Organization. Violence against women prevalence
 estimates, 2018, executive summary, 2021. Available: https://www.​
 who.​int/​publications/​i/​item/​violence-​against-​women-​prevalence-​
 estimates [Accessed 29 Mar 2021].
 3 Devries KM, Mak JY, Bacchus LJ, et al. Intimate partner violence and
 incident depressive symptoms and suicide attempts: a systematic
 review of longitudinal studies. PLoS Med 2013;10:e1001439.
 4 Ellsberg M, Jansen HAFM, Heise L, et al. Intimate partner violence
 and women's physical and mental health in the who multi-­country
 study on women's health and domestic violence: an observational
 study. Lancet 2008;371:1165–72.
 5 Bacchus LJ, Ranganathan M, Watts C, et al. Recent intimate partner
 violence against women and health: a systematic review and meta-­
 analysis of cohort studies. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019995.
 6 Heise L. What works to prevent partner violence: an evidence
 overview, 2011. Available: http://​strive.​lshtm.​ac.​uk/​resources/​what-​
 works-​prevent-​partner-​violence-​evidence-​overview [Accessed
 Mar 2021].
 7 Kerr-­Wilson A, Gibbs A, Fraser E. A rigorous global evidence review
 of interventions to prevent violence against women and girls, 2020.
 
<section> Available: https://www.​whatworks.​co.​za/​documents/​publications/​
 374-​evidence-​reviewfweb/​file [Accessed 29 Mar 2021].
 8 Ellsberg M, Arango DJ, Morton M, et al. Prevention of violence
 against women and girls: what does the evidence say? Lancet
 2015;385:1555–66.
 9 Devries KM, Mak JYT, García-­Moreno C, et al. Global health. the
 global prevalence of intimate partner violence against women.
 
<section> Science 2013;340:1527–8.
 10 Pronyk PM, Hargreaves JR, Kim JC, et al. Effect of a structural
 intervention for the prevention of intimate-­partner violence and
 
<section> HIV in rural South Africa: a cluster randomised trial. Lancet
 2006;368:1973–83.
 11 Garcia-­Moreno C, Jansen HAFM, Ellsberg M, et al. Prevalence of
 intimate partner violence: findings from the WHO multi-­country
 study on women’s health and domestic violence. The Lancet
 2006;368:1260–9.
 Kapiga S, Harvey S, Mshana G, et al. A social empowerment
 intervention to prevent intimate partner violence against women in a
 microfinance scheme in Tanzania: findings from the MAISHA cluster
 randomised controlled trial. Lancet Glob Health 2019;7:e1423–34.
 Harvey S, Lees S, Mshana G. A cluster randomised controlled trial
 to assess the impact on intimate partner violence of a 10-­session
 participatory social empowerment intervention for women in
 
<section> Tanzania (MAISHA CRT02): study protocol, 2019. Available: http://​
 strive.​lshtm.​ac.​uk/​resources/​cluster-​randomised-​controlled-​trial-​
 assess-​impact-​intimate-​partner-​violence-​10-​session [Accessed
 Mar 2021].
 Watts C, Heise L, Garcia-­Moreno C. Putting women first: ethical and
 safety recommendations for research on domestic violence against
 women. Geneva, Switzerland, 2001. https://​apps.​who.​int/​iris/​handle/​
 
<section> 10665/​65893
 Abramsky T, Devries K, Kiss L, et al. Findings from the Sasa! study:
 a cluster randomized controlled trial to assess the impact of a
 community mobilization intervention to prevent violence against
 women and reduce HIV risk in Kampala, Uganda. BMC Med
 2014;12:122.
 Wagman JA, Gray RH, Campbell JC, et al. Effectiveness of
 an integrated intimate partner violence and HIV prevention
 intervention in Rakai, Uganda: analysis of an intervention in
 an existing cluster randomised cohort. Lancet Glob Health
 2015;3:e23–33.
 Abramsky T, Devries K, Kiss L, et al. A community mobilisation
 intervention to prevent violence against women and reduce HIV/
 AIDS risk in Kampala, Uganda (the Sasa! study): study protocol for a
 cluster randomised controlled trial. Trials 2012;13:96.
 Heise L, Pallitto C, García-­Moreno C, et al. Measuring psychological
 abuse by intimate partners: constructing a cross-­cultural indicator
 for the sustainable development goals. SSM Popul Health
 2019;9:100377.
 Gibbs A, Jewkes R, Willan S, et al. Associations between poverty,
 mental health and substance use, gender power, and intimate
 partner violence amongst young (18-30) women and men in urban
 informal settlements in South Africa: a cross-­sectional study and
 structural equation model. PLoS One 2018;13:e0204956.
 Benavides M, León J, Etesse M, et al. Exploring the association
 between segregation and physical intimate partner violence in Lima,
 Peru: the mediating role of gender norms and social capital. SSM
 Popul Health 2019;7:100338.
 Lees S, Marchant M, Selestine V, et al. The transformative
 effects of a participatory social empowerment intervention in the
 MAISHA intimate partner violence trial in Tanzania. Cult Health Sex
 2020:1–16.
 Fulu E, Miedema S, Roselli T, et al. Pathways between childhood
 trauma, intimate partner violence, and Harsh parenting: findings
 from the un Multi-­country study on men and violence in Asia and the
 Pacific. Lancet Glob Health 2017;5:e512–22.
 Jewkes R, Fulu E, Tabassam Naved R, et al. Women's and men's
 reports of past-­year prevalence of intimate partner violence and
 rape and women's risk factors for intimate partner violence: a
 multicountry cross-­sectional study in Asia and the Pacific. PLoS
 Med 2017;14:e1002381.
 Buller AM, Hidrobo M, Peterman A, et al. The way to a man's
 heart is through his stomach?: a mixed methods study on causal
 mechanisms through which cash and in-­kind food transfers
 decreased intimate partner violence. BMC Public Health
 2016;16:488.
 Buller AM, Peterman A, Ranganathan M. A mixed methods review
 of cash transfers and intimate partner in low and middle-­income
 countries, 2018. Available: https://www.​unicef-​irc.​org/​publications/​
 938-​a-​mixed-​method-​review-​of-​cash-​transfers-​and-​intimate-​
 partner-​violence-​in-​low-​and.​html [Accessed 29 Mar 2021].
 Gibbs A, Dunkle K, Mhlongo S, et al. Which men change in intimate
 partner violence prevention interventions? A trajectory analysis in
 Rwanda and South Africa. BMJ Glob Health 2020;5:e002199.
 Gibbs A, Jacobson J, Kerr Wilson A. A global comprehensive review
 of economic interventions to prevent intimate partner violence and
 
<section> HIV risk behaviours. Glob Health Action 2017;10:1290427.
 Peterman A, Palermo TM, Ferrari G. Still a leap of faith: microfinance
 initiatives for reduction of violence against women and children
 in low-­income and middle-­income countries. BMJ Glob Health
 2018;3:e001143.
 Jina R, Jewkes R, Hoffman S, et al. Adverse mental health
 outcomes associated with emotional abuse in young rural South
 
<section> African women: a cross-­sectional study. J Interpers Violence
 2012;27:862–80.