
<section> To cite: Ardrey J, Jehan K,
 Kumbuyo C, et al. ‘Pneumonia
 has gone’: exploring perceptions
 
<section> of health in a cookstove
 
<section> intervention trial in rural
 Malawi. BMJ Global Health
 2021;6:e004596. doi:10.1136/
 
<section> bmjgh-2020-004596
 
<section> Handling editor Stephanie M
 
<section> Topp
 
<section> Received 1 December 2020
 
<section> Accepted 5 July 2021
 
<section> © Author(s) (or their
 employer(s)) 2021. Re-­use
 permitted under CC BY.
 Published by BMJ.
 Department of International
 Public Health, Liverpool School
 of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
 
<section> UK
 Department of Public Health,
 Policy and Systems, Institute of
 Population of Health Sciences,
 
<section> University of Liverpool,
 
<section> Liverpool, UK
 Malawi-­Liverpool-­Wellcome
 
<section> Trust Clinical Research
 Programme, Blantyre, Malawi
 
<section> Department of Clinical
 Sciences, Liverpool School of
 Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK
 
<section> Correspondence to
 
<section> Dr Jane Ardrey;
 ​jane.​ardrey@ l stmed.​ac. u k
 
<section> ‘Pneumonia has gone’:
 
<section> perceptions of health
 
<section> intervention trial in rural
 
<section> Jane Ardrey , 1 Kate Jehan, 2 Caroline Kumbuyo,
 Kevin Mortimer, 4 Rachel Tolhurst
 
<section> ABSTRACT
 
<section> Introduction Air pollution through cooking on open
 fires or inefficient cookstoves using biomass fuels has
 been linked with impaired lung health and with over
 4 million premature deaths per annum. However, use
 of cleaner cookstoves is often sporadic and there are
 indications that longer-­term health benefits are not
 prioritised by users. There is also limited information
 about how recipients of cookstoves perceive the health
 benefits of clean cooking interventions. We therefore
 conducted a qualitative study alongside the Cooking and
 Pneumonia Study (CAPS).
 
<section> Methods Qualitative methods and the participatory
 methodology Photovoice were used in an in-­depth
 examination of health perceptions and understandings
 of CAPS trial participants. Fifty participants in five CAPS
 intervention villages collected images about cooking.
 These were discussed in village-­level focus groups and
 in interviews with 12 representative participants. Village
 community representatives were also interviewed. Four
 female and eight male CAPS fieldworkers took part in
 gender-­specific focus groups and two female and two
 male fieldworkers were interviewed. A thematic content
 approach was used for data analysis.
 
<section> Results We found a disconnect between locally
 situated perceptions of health and the biomedically
 focused trial model. This included the development
 of potentially harmful understandings such as that
 pneumonia was no longer a threat and potential
 confusion between the symptoms of pneumonia
 and malaria. Study participants perceived health
 and well-­being benefits including: cookstoves saved
 bodily energy; quick cooking helped maintain family
 harmony.
 
<section> Conclusion A deeper understanding of narratives
 of health within CAPS showed how context-­specific
 perceptions of the health benefits of cookstoves
 were developed. This highlighted the conflicting
 priorities of cookstove intervention researchers and
 participants, and unintended and potentially harmful
 health understandings. The study also emphasises
 
<section> INTRODUCTION
 the importance of including qualitative explorations in
 similar complex interventions where potential pathways Household
 to beneficial (and harmful) effects, cannot be completely issue
 explicated through biomedical models alone. opment
 relating
 
<section> exploring
 
<section> in a cookstove
 
<section> Malawi
 
<section> 3 Chifundo Ndamala,
 
<section> Key questions
 
<section> What is already known?
 
<section> ► There is evidence that household air pollution from
 the burning of solid fuels in open fires and inefficient
 cookstoves is detrimental to health.
 
<section> ► Cleaner burning cookstoves are available but are of-
 ten used intermittently or in combination with less
 clean alternatives.
 
<section> ► The drivers of adoption of cleaner cookstoves are
 multifactorial and embedded in gendered household
 and community dynamics, with longer-­ term im-
 proved health seldom prioritised.
 
<section> What are the new findings?
 
<section> ► A qualitative and participatory approach led to a
 rich understanding of locally situated health-­based
 priorities, which differed from the biomedical health
 messages of the trial.
 
<section> ► The development of ‘syncretic’ understandings of
 the link between pneumonia and cookstoves, pos-
 sibly inadvertently communicated through trial mes-
 saging, may have potentially harmful unintended
 consequences.
 
<section> ► Users perceived the cookstoves as ‘healthier’ be-
 cause they saved strength when lighting and tend-
 ing, and because quick cooking facilitated family
 harmony.
 
<section> What do the new findings imply?
 
<section> ► An important implication of these findings is that
 health interventions and trials may result in unexpect-
 ed and potentially harmful health understandings.
 
<section> ► The health priorities of the implementors of techno-
 logical interventions and those of users, may differ
 considerably.
 
<section> ► Gaining a deeper understanding of biosocial percep-
 tions of health and well-­being within interventions
 using qualitative and participatory methodologies,
 can promote the health priorities of research partic-
 ipants and militate against negative health impacts.
 
<section> air pollution is a multisectoral
 linked with several Sustainable Devel-
 Goals (SDGs) with specific targets
 to clean energy in homes, improving 
<section> air quality and a reduction in air pollution-­related deaths
 and illness. 1 It is estimated that in 2019 household air
 pollution (HAP) from burning biomass fuels primarily
 for cooking, contributed to 2.31 million deaths. 2 The
 use of open fires or inefficient cookstoves for cooking
 is widespread in many low-­income and middle-­income
 countries (LMICs) 3 including in Malawi where 98% of
 the population cook using biomass fuels.
 HAP can lead to harmful and irreversible effects on
 the lung and other health systems. 5 As the development
 of lung and immune systems occurs both prenatally and
 throughout early life, exposure to air pollution at these
 times can be particularly detrimental. 5 HAP has also
 been linked with respiratory infections in older children
 and adults which are leading causes of morbidity and
 mortality especially in LMICs. 3 Pneumonia in under-­5s
 accounts for 15% of all deaths in this age group. 6 Chil-
 dren and their mothers can be greatly exposed to HAP
 where cooking using biomass fuels takes place.
 The use of cleaner burning cookstoves has been
 proposed as a solution to HAP by advocacy organisations
 such as the Clean Cooking Alliance with suggested bene-
 fits including environmental remediation and improved
 health. 8 The Cooking and Pneumonia Study (CAPS) was
 carried out in rural Malawi from 2013 to 2016 with the aim
 of testing the hypothesis that the considerable burden of
 pneumonia in under-­5s in this setting, could be attribut-
 able to HAP from open fire cooking. Two cleaner burning
 biomass cookstoves were given to households in interven-
 tion villages and control village residents continued to
 cook on open fires. 9 The trial found that there was no
 evidence of a reduction of pneumonia in the intervention
 group. Among the multifactorial reasons for this result, it
 was suggested that sustained use of any cleaner cooking
 interventions, whether cookstoves or fuels would need to
 ‘achieve a high level of acceptance’ in order for health
 benefits to be realised. 9 As Gordon et al describe, the use
 of old and new technology alongside one another (so
 called ‘stacking’), and a reduction or stopping of clean
 cookstove use over time presents significant challenges to
 clean cooking interventions generally.
 Within clinical trials and most health-­based research, a
 biomedical model of health predominates. However, this
 biomedical framing is not the sole or even the dominant
 framing of health among lay populations. For example,
 in Greco et al’s exploration of well-­being among rural
 Malawian women, the authors found that locally defined
 quality of life measures extended beyond the material and
 were ‘highly dependent on complex feelings, relations
 and social norms’ that were vividly expressed by study
 participants. 10 In addition, there can be important differ-
 ences between the health perceptions and understand-
 ings of health research participants, and the researchers
 who instigate and conduct trials. 11
 Social relationships within trials are likely to be influen-
 tial but generally under-­researched or under-­recognised
 in health research and policymaking. 13 14 One way to
 explore these differences is through the lens of ‘medical
 syncretism’ as described by Muela et al, 15 which suggests
 that biomedical and local concepts of health might be
 blended and merged to create understandings that may
 differ from those intended.
 There also appears to be a mismatch between the
 emphasis on the health benefits of cookstoves as promoted
 by researchers and implementors and the priorities of
 cookstove users. 16 17 As described above, there are indica-
 tions that cookstove users living in difficult circumstances
 may prioritise other useful factors beyond longer-­term
 ‘invisible’ health impacts. However, little is known about
 how cookstove users perceive the impact of cookstoves
 on their health. In this study, qualitative methods and
 the participatory methodology Photovoice were used to
 explore understandings of health within a large-­ scale
 cookstove intervention, with the aim of encouraging a
 greater emphasis on the health and well-­being of cook-
 stove intervention recipients in low-­income settings.
 Qualitative methods are often used as part of large-­
 scale clinical trials, to explore in more detail the percep-
 tions of participants and in recognition of the complexity
 of the social contexts in which the research takes place.
 In a mixed-­ method systematic review of barriers and
 enablers to uptake of improved cookstoves, Rehfuess et
 al found 31 factors that influence uptake but concluded
 that while some are more important than others, none
 can ensure sustained adoption. 19 Stanistreet et al carried
 out an in-­depth analysis of the 14 qualitative studies iden-
 tified, with the aim of exploring views of cookstove users
 and stakeholders on these factors. 20 They concluded that
 qualitative research ‘can provide a voice for the stove
 user’ especially regarding contextual decision-­ making
 about cookstove use.
 While recognising the value of qualitative research in
 exploring perceptions of health in a cookstove interven-
 tion, the aim of this study was to move away from the
 dichotomy of barriers and enablers, in order to chal-
 lenge existing ‘hierarchies of knowledge’ 21 in global
 health, including biomedical health narratives. In addi-
 tion, the use of qualitative and participatory methodolo-
 gies acknowledges that randomised controlled trials such
 as CAPS have ‘deep social implications’ 14 including the
 development and shifting of understandings of health.
 Photovoice is rooted in the emancipatory thinking of
 Paulo Freire, feminist research methodology and inclu-
 sive documentary photography, and like other partici-
 patory methodologies, it recognises that all people are
 sources of expertise. 22 The methodology was initially
 designed to explore perceptions of health 23–25 and has
 been used in many contexts; examples in Malawi include
 a study of well-­ being of palliative care patients 26 and
 adolescent well-­being. 27 There has, however, been limited
 use of the methodology in relation to cookstove interven-
 tions, exceptions being the pilot work for this study 28 and
 a study with potential users of portable gas cookstoves in
 Cameroon.
 Qualitative methods and the participatory method-
 ology Photovoice were therefore combined in this study 
<insert> Figure 1 Overview of timeline, methods, methodology and
 participants. CAPS, Cooking and Pneumonia Study; COLT,
 Community Liaison Team. 
<iend>

 with the overall aim of gaining a deeper understanding of
 the sociocultural context of cookstove use within CAPS,
 and the implications of this for future implementation
 of clean cooking initiatives. One of the original research
 objectives was to explore the perceived and experienced
 benefits of using improved cookstoves from the perspec-
 tives of trial participants and fieldworkers. This and the
 other objectives were changed in response to inductively
 derived findings to develop three research questions. In
 this manuscript we report on health-­related findings that
 respond to the following question: ‘How do CAPS partic-
 ipants experience the trial and how is this linked with
 understandings of health, technology, and the research
 process?’. Other findings will be reported elsewhere.
 
<section> METHODS
 
<section> Study setting and design
 This study was carried out in Chikwawa in rural Malawi.
 In 2018, the World Bank estimated that over 50% of the
 Malawian population were living in poverty due to limited
 economic opportunities and reliance on low productive
 agriculture. 30 The country has a high disease burden
 and leading causes of mortality include childhood pneu-
 monia 31 and non-­ communicable diseases. 32 Almost all
 of the population, 98% in 2015, 4 cook using solid fuels
 and HAP exposure is widespread. The Malawi-­Liverpool-­
 Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Centre (MLW) has
 carried out research in Chikwawa since 2002. 33 Their
 Chikwawa site office was one of two bases for the CAPS
 conducted between 2013 and 2016 9 and for this nested
 qualitative study. A phased qualitative research study was
 carried out between April and November 2016 using
 observation, focus groups, interviews and the participa-
 tory methodology Photovoice.
 Photovoice was used in this study both in acknowledge-
 ment of the effectiveness of the methodology in eluci-
 dating the hidden in the everyday practice of cooking,
 but also in recognition of the expertise of cooks in Chik-
 wawa and their valuable experiential knowledge. 35 The
 experience of the first author when piloting the meth-
 odology within CAPS, indicated that Photovoice had the
 potential to facilitate a deep exploration of the everyday
 realities of participant’s lives and to militate against the
 social desirability bias that might be anticipated in this
 type of ‘nested’ study. 34 Social desirability bias is the
 tendency of research participants to present themselves
 favourably 36 and within CAPS could potentially have led
 to overly positive reporting of cookstove benefits. Visual
 methodologies such as Photovoice have been shown to
 shift the focus of the research encounter towards partic-
 ipants who collect and discuss images that reflect their
 own concerns. 24 37
 As delineated by the originators of Photovoice meth-
 odology, the focus was on the definition and interpre-
 tation of images by participants and not the images
 themselves. 24 Photovoice activities therefore included
 focus group discussions (FGDs) and interviews. In the
 Photovoice FGDs the SHOWeD acronym employed by
 
<section> Wang and Burris, that is: what do you See here?; what’s
 really Happening here?; how does this relate to Our
 lives?; Why does this problem or this strength exist?; what
 can we Do about this? 39 was incorporated into the study
 design to encourage wide ranging, open discussion.
 In summary, this was a qualitative study in which
 methods of observation, FGDs and interviews were
 blended with the participatory methodology Photovoice
 in a flexible and iterative study design developed over
 time, with three phases in April, July and November 2016
 
<section> as shown in figure
 
<section> Study participants
 
<section> The study sample included three groups: CAPS trial
 participants, fieldworkers and Community Liaison Team
 members (CoLTs). The role of the CoLT within MLW is
 similar to that of other Community Advisory Groups in
 comparable settings. CoLTs are residents of places where
 MLW carry out research and an important part of their
 role is to identify and feedback the concerns of research
 participants to MLW. 40 CAPS trial participants were from
 five intervention villages. The study villages were purpo-
 sively selected as representative of the wider CAPS cohort
 using factors such as size, availability of facilities such as
 school and clinics and access to trading centres.
 The main selection criterion for Photovoice partici-
 pants was gender; eight women and two men from each
 village were recruited in recognition of the primary role
 of women as family cooks and of the unequal intrahouse-
 hold power of men, in this context. 41 This sample was also
 purposively selected to include a range of ages, female
 heads of households and non-­users of cookstoves. Each
 village had an assigned CoLT member who was recruited
 for this study. They were all in their 40s, married with
 children and had been CoLT members for some years;
 two were women and three men. CAPS fieldworker
 participants were symbolically representative of the wider
 fieldworker group. That is, although they participated 
<section> voluntarily and were not purposively selected, the group
 represented a range of ages, experience, seniority and
 gender. There were 12 fieldworkers recruited, eight
 were men and four women which reflected the existing
 unequal gender mix. From these 12, four fieldworkers
 were interviewed, two women and two men; they were all
 in their 30s and had been CAPS fieldworkers from the
 outset of the study.
 In each of the five selected villages, the following activ-
 ities were carried out: observation of a cooking session;
 Photovoice training, image collection and focus group;
 semi-­structured interviews with three Photovoice and one
 observation participant. The latter designation refers to
 the women that prepared a meal while being observed
 by the CAPS Qualitative Research Assistant (CK) and
 the first author (JA). In two of the villages the observa-
 tion participant was also a Photovoice participant. The
 CoLT members for each village were interviewed and
 asked: to share their views on how CAPS participants
 viewed the trial and whether it had beneficial or negative
 impacts; about family structures in Chikwawa and how
 family members spent their time; what is good health for
 someone living in Chikwawa. Eight male fieldworkers and
 four female fieldworkers participated in gender-­specific
 FGDs in which they discussed any differences between
 CAPS and other research, whether CAPS was beneficial
 for participants and barriers and motivators of adoption
 of the cookstoves. From those groups, two male and two
 female fieldworkers were interviewed, to explore more
 deeply the potential benefits of cookstoves, how this may
 be linked with gendered household roles, illiteracy and
 religious beliefs and what fieldworkers thought partici-
 pants understood by the term pneumonia.
 The Photovoice element of this study was informed
 by pilot work described elsewhere. 34 In each selected
 village, there were three stages in the Photovoice process.
 First, Photovoice participants were trained in the use of a
 
<section> Figure 2 Photovoice focus group discussion SHOWeD questions.
 
<section> digital camera by a local photographer and advised about
 potential problems that may be encountered, with an
 emphasis on the avoidance of risk. CK then explained the
 aim of the Photovoice process and facilitated a discussion
 of the ethical collection of images. Each participant was
 asked to collect 50 images over 5 days showing: what they
 ate; how this food was cooked; who cooked the food; who
 they cooked and ate with. Participants were informed
 that they could take 20 images for themselves to keep.
 After 5 days, the cameras were collected and taken to
 the nearest town to be processed. The first 75 images
 on each camera were printed off and distributed to
 the photographers at village level focus groups. FGDs
 took place in local village facilities such as schools or
 communal buildings. The images selected for discussion
 by the participants were spread out on large sheets of
 paper on the floor and grouped into discussion themes,
 in line with the process of selecting and contextualising of
 images recommended by Wang and Burris. 22 Practically,
 participants selected the images they wanted to discuss
 and began the contextualisation by grouping together
 images related to a specific topic. Example discussion
 themes included types of cooking apparatus such as
 open fires and types of cookstoves but also related to the
 growing, preparation and sharing of food. An amended
 version of the SHOWeD acronym 39 was used as shown
 in figure 2 to encourage deeper discussion of the story
 behind the images. Figure 3 shows a Photovoice FGD in
 progress in Village 2 with participants gathered around
 grouped images so that all had the opportunity to view
 and contribute to the discussion
 Finally, in November 2016, semi-­structured interviews
 were carried out with selected Photovoice participants
 and the observation participants, informed by interim
 analysis. Interviewees were asked: about food they had
 cooked the previous day including where it was obtained,
 how it was cooked and who shared it; to reflect on any 
<insert> Figure 3 Photovoice focus group discussion in progress in
 Village 
<iend>

 
<insert> Table 1 Photovoice participant demographic details
 Village Gender Age range List of participant occupations
 8 female
 2 male
 24–32
 28–50
 Bicycle hire; casual labourer; subsistence farmer (7 as primary occupation and 3
 as secondary).
 8 female
 2 male
 20–65
 23–32
 Bicycle hire; casual labourer; subsistence farmer (7 as primary occupation and 3
 as secondary).
 8 female
 2 male
 23–38
 46–51
 Sells doughnuts; sells maize; builder; guard; subsistence farmer (6 as primary
 occupation and 2 as secondary); pastor.
 8 female
 2 male
 18–35
 30–36
 All—primary occupation of subsistence farmer; shop owner; charcoal burner.
 8 female
 2 male
 20–49
 23–53
 Sells doughnuts; shop owner; pump attendant; sells phones; commercial farmer;
 subsistence farmer (6 primary occupation and 3 as secondary). 
<iend>

 health impacts of the intervention cookstoves; and how
 any saved time from faster cooking was used.
 Demographic details of Photovoice participants are in
 
<section> table
 An overview of the timeline, methods/methodology
 used and participants, is shown in figure 1. The first
 author (JA) was present for and co-­ordinated all activities
 with the exception of two of the fieldworker interviews.
 CK led on the selection of participants, conducted the
 remaining two fieldworker interviews and provided trans-
 lation throughout.
 
<section> Data analysis
 
<section> All focus groups and interviews were recorded using
 digital recorders and translation and transcription was
 carried out by CK and the MLW translation and tran-
 scription team. Thematic data analysis was completed by
 JA using the framework approach, a visual method using
 matrices to facilitate comparison of data. 42 Data was coded
 inductively, and the same codes were applied across the
 data set. The following steps were undertaken: familiarisa-
 tion with transcript content; coding of each transcript to
 develop a set of codes and subcodes; creation of a frame-
 work of all codes; summarising of data within framework;
 development of categories through collated codes; final
 mapping and interpretation. Inductive interim analysis
 was carried out between the July and November data
 collection periods to guide the development of interview
 topic guides. The framework analysis process facilitated
 the development of three research questions congruent
 with the overall study aim.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement
 Photovoice participants were free to collect and
 discuss images that were important to them and there-
 fore contributed to data collection and analysis. Each
 Photovoice village group also selected 10 images for exhi-
 bition and appointed two representatives who presented
 and discussed these at Photovoice exhibitions in the local
 community.
 
<section> RESULTS
 
<section> Analysis of data from this study suggests that there was a
 divide between CAPS participants’ largely local and social
 understanding of health, which emphasises well-­being,
 and the biomedical messages that underpinned the CAPS
 trial and are inherent to much of MLW’s research. These
 local understandings of health can be described under
 three thematic areas. Theme 1, definitions of good health in
 Chikwawa provides the context for themes 2 and 3: trans-
 formation of understandings of pneumonia and unanticipated
 health benefits of cookstoves.
 
<section> Theme 1: definitions of good health in Chikwawa
 Although CoLT members had a key role in the imple-
 mentation of CAPS, including facilitating community
 meetings and fieldwork activities, when asked about good
 health in Chikwawa, they did not mention pneumonia or
 the potential health benefits of cookstoves. Instead they
 linked health with various factors specific to the local
 environment and particularly the prevalence of hunger
 linked with precarious livelihoods largely reliant on agri-
 culture.
 CoLT members described a healthy person as having
 a secure livelihood and access to food. That is, someone
 
<section> who:
 
<section> is working, maybe on the farm, who has surplus food at his
 house. (CoLT member Village 1) 
<section> uses it [money] properly for their health…when buying
 your food, you should consider all six groups of food.
 
<section> (CoLT member Village 4)
 
<section> On the other hand, an unhealthy person is described
 
<section> as follows:
 
<section> [M]aybe we can say that the woman, children or the man,
 they may not be healthy as it is hard to obtain food in our
 area. (CoLT member Village 2)
 
<section> Study participants described how people needed to
 be physically able to carry out work for them to obtain
 enough food for a healthy life. Owning land and livestock
 was also seen as important for promoting good health,
 as this provided the means to grow crops or rear animals
 that could be consumed or sold for profit. However,
 agriculture was also seen as potentially unreliable and
 multiple livelihood sources were recommended.
 CoLT members also suggested that those who are not
 able to provide for their families are lacking in educa-
 tion; this is seen to lead to ‘ignorance’ and a healthy life
 is dependent on making informed decisions. Conversely,
 those who attend school are better able to plan their
 families and provide for their education and nutrition.
 Interviewees connected ill-­ health with being finan-
 cially insecure and struggling to provide for families, as
 
<section> described below:
 
<section> So, maybe we should say that the healthy life is that one
 which does not have another thought [that is, no worries]
 and also maybe your children are few, you have given birth
 to few children, then it means the food is enough at the
 home so then they say this lady is healthy. (female CoLT
 
<section> member Village 2)
 
<section> Worry and ‘thinking too much’ were sometimes seen as
 linked with marital infidelity and leading to loss of appe-
 tite and hopelessness.
 
<section> First, worries cause a person to be in bad health because
 you think too much…you cannot eat because you are
 thinking too much. For those in marriages it can be quar-
 rels, maybe the husband or wife is having extra marital af-
 fairs so once they start thinking about that they think too
 much and even about hanging themselves. (male CoLT
 
<section> member Village 4)
 
<section> In this way, CoLT members clearly described the perva-
 sive impact of family discord as detrimental to health
 and well-­being, linking this with the insecure food and
 livelihood context of Chikwawa, which provides daily
 challenges.
 
<section> Theme 2: transformation of understandings of pneumonia
 As detailed in the introduction, CAPS did not result in a
 reduction in childhood pneumonia in study intervention
 villages. Despite this, when discussing the benefits of the
 trial, CAPS participants suggested that there had been a
 significant decrease in incidence of the disease. A female
 
<section> Photovoice participant said that:
 
<section> With the coming of this research we saw that pneumonia
 has decreased…Yes, we can say that all of us present here
 can give testimonies…Yes, when all the women received
 these stoves, we have not heard of any children ill with
 pneumonia. (female CAPS trial participant Village 3 FGD)
 
<section> CAPS fieldworkers provided some indication of why
 CAPS trial participants reported that pneumonia had
 gone. They played a crucial role in all trial processes in
 villages including communicating extensively with the
 participants about the possibility of a link between pneu-
 monia and cookstoves. Although trial participants knew
 about childhood pneumonia and many would have had
 personal experience of its devastating impact, the poten-
 tial link with cookstoves was a new factor.
 Male fieldworkers who participated in the FGDs agreed
 that CAPS seemed ‘so scientific’ to the trial participants
 during the initial sensitisation stage and during field visits,
 suggesting that this information was not in their frame of
 reference and needed to be interpreted. They reported
 that CAPS participants rarely mentioned pneumonia,
 but one FGD member described how those trial partici-
 pants ‘with a little bit of knowledge’ described how pneu-
 monia was prevented because the cookstoves created a
 gas that then circulated through the house (male CAPS
 fieldworker). Others agreed that many CAPS participants
 formulate their own understandings and rationalisations
 of the link between cookstoves and pneumonia.
 This issue was probed more deeply in the semi-­
 structured interviews with CAPS trial participants. By
 this stage (November 2016), many of the cookstoves had
 stopped working due to problems with the battery or
 other maintenance issues. This resulted in a shift in the
 narrative with interviewees suggesting that pneumonia
 had come back after the cookstoves became defunct.
 They commonly referred to pneumonia ‘going’ and
 ‘coming back’, although it was not clear whether these
 descriptions were metaphorical (referring to a decline in
 pneumonia) or indicating a literal ‘distancing’ of pneu-
 monia (through some mechanism of the cookstoves).
 When asked why pneumonia may have ‘gone’, inter-
 viewees reported their own experience of this phenom-
 enon as in the example below:
 
<section> [Now that use of cookstoves has been] abandoned, when
 going to the hospital…you will hear that children are be-
 ing diagnosed with pneumonia. (female CAPS trial partici-
 
<section> pant Village 5 interviewee)
 
<section> The cookstoves were also linked with a reduction of
 other diseases including malaria and some participants
 suggested that receipt of the cookstoves alone (and
 not their use) led to these beneficial effects, as in this
 
<section> statement:
 
<section> Ever since [we received the cookstoves] the child has nev-
 er been diagnosed at the hospital with either pneumonia
 or malaria or any other disease. (female CAPS trial partici-
 
<section> pant Village 4 interviewee)
 
<section> In the CAPS fieldworker interviews, these ideas were
 explored further, and the response of interviewees indi-
 cates that existing understandings of pneumonia were 
<insert> Figure 4 Image of older woman blowing on fire to light it.
 fire is going down, then add in our firewood while that one
 [the cookstove], even when the firewood is ending, when
 we want to add the firewood, it will still blow it. (female
 CAPS trial participant Village 2 FGD) 
<iend>

 changed through participation in CAPS. This included
 positive developments such as greater awareness of child-
 hood pneumonia. However, there were also indications
 that existing ideas of pneumonia were merged with new
 understandings resulting in potentially negative conse-
 quences such as confusion between symptoms of pneu-
 monia and other diseases, and delay in treatment seeking
 for pneumonia.
 For example, a female fieldworker explained that
 through CAPS science communication activities, partic-
 ipants had more understanding of the extent of child-
 hood pneumonia and that it can be life-­threatening. A
 male CAPS fieldworker suggested that CAPS had resulted
 in earlier identification of pneumonia instead of at a
 later, more severe stage, where the child is ‘breathing fast
 and whistling’ (male CAPS fieldworker).
 However, both male and female CAPS fieldworker inter-
 viewees also described how CAPS had resulted in cook-
 stoves being associated with pneumonia. As described by
 a male fieldworker:
 
<section> …the use of the word pneumonia in minds of the partic-
 ipants, I think the word was mostly used when they are
 talking to us …when we are [introducing the cookstoves]
 we are bringing the word pneumonia, I think there was
 little [knowledge about pneumonia before the trial] in the
 minds of participants.
 
<section> A female fieldworker suggests that participants not
 only began to associate cookstoves and pneumonia, but
 also to link the intervention with prevention of disease
 
<section> generally, as below:
 
<section> Because we said this is a study for cooking and pneumonia
 … they say this is the end of the pneumonia diseases once
 they receive the cook stove… [whereas some] take every
 disease as pneumonia, not the real pneumonia [that is,
 they confuse pneumonia with other diseases and associate
 the cookstoves with the decline of diseases in general].
 In summary, CAPS resulted in the development of new
 understandings of pneumonia among trial participants.
 There were indications of potentially positive impacts
 through increased knowledge about symptoms. However,
 participants also reported that pneumonia had ‘gone’
 because they had received cookstoves and appeared
 to link the receipt of cookstoves with improved disease
 management in general. Unanticipated and novel health
 benefits of cookstoves to CAPS participants were also
 identified and will be discussed in the next section.
 
<section> Theme 3: unanticipated perceived health and well-being
 
<section> benefits of cookstoves
 CAPS trial participants, CoLT members and fieldworkers
 agreed that cookstoves were seen as healthier because it
 was not necessary to blow on them during lighting and
 throughout cooking. This view is clearly expressed in a
 
<section> CAPS participant Photovoice FGD as follows:
 Those ones [participant points to a photo of an open fire]
 need us to blow air into, while the other ones blow them-
 selves… we will just be taking our firewood and see that the
 In some cases, descriptions of this benefit include
 references to smoke inhalation and suggestions that
 ‘not blowing’ and reduced smoke were linked with the
 perceived reduction in pneumonia. For example, when
 asked why he thought pneumonia had declined, a CoLT
 
<section> member said:
 
<section> I believe because the parents were now using the cook-
 stoves, because they no longer blew the air. They no longer
 had difficulties to blow fire. There was no smoke. (male
 
<section> CoLT member Village 4)
 
<section> When discussing this benefit, respondents also referred
 to the particular difficulty that elderly, infirm people or
 pregnant women had when they needed to tend an open
 fire, as illustrated in figure 4 and described below:
 [There was] no need for me to bend or blow air, the cook-
 stove is blowing the air for me up until I gave birth. (female
 CAPS trial participant Village 1 FGD)
 
<section> The difficulty described by a CoLT member of
 convincing CAPS participants to enrol in ancillary studies,
 indicates how in this context, breath may be seen as some-
 thing to conserve and linked with bodily strength. These
 substudies of CAPS involved the temporary installation of
 household air monitors in homes or spirometry tests. She
 said those refusing to participate did not ‘think about
 their health but that you are exhausting their breath’
 (CoLT member Village 2). Conversely, cookstoves were
 therefore valued as cooks did not need to expend breath
 and strength during use. This direct health benefit to
 cookstove users only became evident through continued
 use of the cookstoves and appears to have been an unan-
 ticipated aspect of the cookstove both to CAPS partici-
 pants, workers and researchers. This shows that accessing
 the expertise of (primarily female) cooks can identify
 context-­specific health drivers of cookstove use. 
<section> A second benefit of cookstoves identified by CAPS
 participants is closely linked to the local context of
 juggling farming activities with other work and school
 commitments of families. CAPS trial participants describe
 how they value cookstoves as they allow food to be cooked
 more quickly than is possible with open-­fire methods.
 For example, referring to grouped images of different
 cooking methods in the FGD in Village 1:
 
<section> On the three stone fire, the food takes a long time to be
 ready and charcoal stoves make you to be too late because
 [it needs to] catch fire …while that one which has a fan
 [the intervention cookstove] …in a short period of time
 the water is warm, even nsima is ready in a short time (fe-
 male CAPS trial participant Village 1 FGD)
 
<section> This faster cooking is linked with women having more
 time for other household responsibilities including
 farm work and more opportunity for rest. However, this
 feature is also valued because it facilitates timeliness, that
 is, it allows cooking to be done or occur within a favour-
 able time. For hungry families who are carrying out hard
 manual work growing crops on ‘gardens’ not close to their
 homes, this is a valuable feature. In addition, farming in
 Chikwawa, whether on a small or larger scale, is often
 combined with informal, insecure and often arduous
 work outside the home. As discussed earlier, participants
 defined good health as having enough to eat, which in
 turn depended on the ability to participate in precarious
 livelihood options.
 A male COLT member describes this benefit:
 [W]e saw that once we are back from the garden, within
 10 minutes 20 minutes everything is ready. (CoLT member
 
<section> Village 4)
 
<section> A female CAPS trial participant suggests that faster
 
<section> cooking is helpful as:
 
<section> …the food gets prepared so fast that the children do go
 to school, and the husband does go to work in good time.
 And it also makes things fast so that if the husband is hun-
 gry, in just a little bit of time, if you are cooking beans, it
 gets cooked in just a little bit of time. (female CAPS trial
 
<section> participant Village 1 FGD)
 
<section> Overall, time saving through cookstoves is seen as
 beneficial by CAPS participants as it allows them more
 free time and to be on time for school and work commit-
 ments. Time saved contributes to family harmony for
 both these reasons, and because it allows hungry people
 to be fed quickly. Although it has been suggested that
 faster cooking is linked with time-­saving and increased
 economic opportunities for women and school attend-
 ance of girls, 43–45 the specific benefit of timeliness and the
 link with household harmony and therefore improved
 health has not previously been identified.
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 Syncretic understandings of health within CAPS
 Although biomedicine is the dominant model in global
 health systems, it is itself a cultural construct related
 to changing European perceptions of the body in the
 nineteenth century. 46 Although medical research and
 biomedically oriented trials are often beneficial for popu-
 lation health through impacts on health policy and treat-
 ment, the pervasiveness of biomedicine, has been linked
 with the extension of the power of medical professionals
 and with colonisation. 47 Kleinman’s influential character-
 isation of health systems as medically pluralistic, suggests
 that in most contexts differing medical traditions in the
 professional, traditional and popular sector coexist.
 However, proponents of medical syncretism argue that
 a binary view of ‘biomedical’ versus ‘lay’ or ‘traditional’
 concepts often over-­simplifies the ways in which ideas
 about health are always changing, including the incor-
 poration of biomedical into lay concepts and vice versa.
 Medical syncretism also places more emphasis on prac-
 tice as ‘a creative process in which we must recognize
 the role of invention, innovation, and disorder’. 46 This
 is illustrated by Muela et al with regard to perceptions of
 ‘fever’ and ‘malaria’ in a highly researched Tanzanian
 community, who showed how ‘people are not a “blank
 slate” but ‘process new information on the basis of what
 they already know’’. 15 Similarly, in a study investigating
 understandings of fever and malaria in the ACTia trial
 which preceded CAPS in Chikwawa, Ewing et al found
 that the health information from ACTia was intermin-
 gled with what was already known, resulting in differing
 interpretations of fever which in turn impacted on
 treatment seeking. 49 The authors of a systematic review
 of care-­ seeking for childhood diarrhoea, malaria and
 pneumonia in sub-­Saharan Africa also concluded that
 there are often considerable differences between how
 researchers and study participants perceive illness.
 The results of this qualitative study suggest that CAPS
 participant understandings of health were changed
 through participating in the trial, in that people’s inter-
 pretation of trial health messaging created a new linkage
 between cookstoves and pneumonia. The distinction
 between comprehension and interpretation made by
 Downie et al provides a useful way of exploring how
 these changes occurred. The authors suggest that inter-
 pretation is closely linked with the ‘thinking frame-
 work’ of the recipient. 51 CAPS participants were asked
 to comprehend health messages communicated via the
 trial and mediated through CoLT members and CAPS
 fieldworkers. Their interpretation of these biomedical
 health narratives provided another layer of complexity
 and the possibility of misunderstandings and unexpected
 consequences.
 It appears that this interpretation included the idea that
 cookstoves prevent pneumonia. Participant descriptions
 of why this may be the case were often complicated, and
 there was some confusion between pneumonia and other
 bio-­medically defined diseases, particularly malaria. It is
 clear however that this led to health understandings that
 could potentially have harmful consequences, in the light
 of the negative findings of the main CAPS trial. That is,
 it did not lead to a reduction in incidence of pneumonia 
<section> in under-­5s. 9 Therefore, there was little benefit in associ-
 ating cookstoves with ‘no pneumonia’, and the potential
 for harm if such understandings led to delayed treatment
 seeking for pneumonia or other diseases. More widely,
 this illustrates the complex challenge of communicating
 trial objectives to participants and the potential of misin-
 terpretation within a non-­biomedical understanding of
 health.
 
<section> The importance of considering local understandings of health
 The health and well-­being benefits of cookstoves identi-
 fied by CAPS participants are novel and situated in daily
 practice and a context of food and livelihood insecurity.
 They differ from the health benefits of cookstoves as
 described in the introduction, which are wide-­ranging
 and largely expressed within a biomedical framework. By
 contrast, the health benefits of saving strength through
 not blowing, and timeliness improving family harmony,
 are local and social, linking to wider well-­being. 10 This
 finding also indicates that researchers and cookstove
 intervention participants may have differing health
 priorities. If cookstoves are promoted for their benefi-
 cial impact on longer-­term health, for example, as by the
 Malawian cookstove movement Mbaula, 52 the opportuni-
 ties may be missed both to produce cookstoves that meet
 the health needs of users, and that are used more consist-
 ently over the longer-­term.
 Studies that use qualitative methods and participatory
 methodologies have been shown to provide insight into
 understandings that bridge biomedical and social aspects
 of health. For example, Avotri and Walters demon-
 strated how, in contrast to a common research focus on
 disease and reproductive health in low-­income settings,
 Ghanaian women emphasised how their productive roles
 and ongoing financial insecurity led to ‘worrying too
 much’, headaches and debilitating tiredness. 53 Similarly,
 in Bates et al’s Photovoice study of the well-­being of palli-
 ative care patients in urban Malawi, the authors found
 that ‘emotional well-­being, social functioning and contri-
 bution’ were key and that ability to work and well-­being
 were closely linked.
 The use of the participatory methodology Photo-
 voice in this study allowed a deeper understanding of
 the potential health and well-­ being benefits of cook-
 stoves within a specific context. When asked to collect
 images about the cooking process, Photovoice partic-
 ipants collected and discussed images of growing and
 processing food and in doing so extended the context
 of the cooking process beyond the home to encompass
 all activities referred to by Meah as ‘foodwork’. 55 That
 is, they included planting, tending and harvesting crops
 and the preparation and sale of food, therefore making
 clear that the local economic environment of insecure
 farming and other work was linked with ‘foodwork’ and
 ultimately, cookstove use.
 These results demonstrate that the health impacts of
 the cookstoves as a technological intervention were bioso-
 cial, suggesting that it may be important for researchers
 to pay attention to health as a social construction and
 interventions as social processes. Through their partici-
 pation in the trial, cookstove users realised that there was
 an alternative to open-­fire cooking that preserved their
 breath and energy and allowed them to provide meals
 quickly for fractious family members. In this way, the
 possibility of achieving good health as locally defined was
 enhanced.
 
<section> Implications for further research
 The results of this study have key implications for
 further research into clean cooking and for health-­based
 research in low-­income settings at the local, national, and
 global level.
 The findings suggest that within MLW and similar
 research institutions based in low-­income settings, the
 design of further clinical trials and science communi-
 cation initiatives would benefit from a deeper under-
 standing of how biomedical health information is merged
 with existing knowledge. In addition, in recognition that
 new health knowledge that is developed may not always
 be helpful, researchers would benefit from capturing
 unanticipated and unintended consequences of under-
 standings of health, through ongoing process analysis of
 trials.
 The unexpected health and well-­being benefits ascer-
 tained in this study of cookstoves, that is, facilitating
 timeliness and saving strength through not blowing,
 have implications at the local and national level. There
 are ongoing cookstove initiatives in Malawi including the
 US$1.1. million Malawi Clean Cooking Fund launched in
 2020 and various non-­governmental projects that could
 use these findings to maximise the chances that their
 interventions have a positive impact on health and well-­
 being. That is, through guiding the development of cook-
 stoves that meet the needs of cooks and their families, in
 terms of usability and enhancing well-­being.
 Globally, these results imply that health researchers
 working in low-­ income settings and particularly the
 implementors of clean cooking interventions, should
 prioritise exploration of the locally situated health prior-
 ities of participants. This is important to assess whether
 such interventions meet the priorities of recipients, are
 beneficial to the target population, and how any benefits
 should be defined and measured.
 At all levels, local, national and global, these results
 suggest that qualitative methods and the participatory
 methodology Photovoice can be valuable when exploring
 complex health understandings. This facilitates in-­depth
 exploration of how knowledge of health is shaped in
 RCTs and other large-­scale interventions and makes a
 valuable contribution to the interpretation of clinical
 results and to implementation.
 
<section> Strengths and limitations
 This was a small-­ scale qualitative study carried out in
 a specific highly researched location and generalisa-
 tion of the results is therefore limited. The Photovoice 
<section> element of the research was carried out over a short
 time period which has been identified as a limiting
 factor when assessing the participatory basis of such
 research. 56 As other Photovoice researchers have found,
 see for example Bates et al discussion of the difficulty of
 visualising discrimination, 54 the ‘intangible’ concept of
 ‘health’ required further probing in interviews. In addi-
 tion, regarding the health perceptions findings, no explo-
 ration was carried out prior to the trial, since this change
 was unintended. However, Photovoice allowed the direct
 engagement of CAPS participants as researchers who
 reflected on and communicated the challenges and
 highlights of their daily lives. The positionality of the
 first author was considered reflexively throughout the
 research process and Photovoice was incorporated into
 the research design to mitigate the outsider status of the
 first author and any trial-­related social desirability bias.
 Triangulation of sources through including fieldworkers
 and CoLT members in exploring health perceptions of
 CAPS participants, enhanced trustworthiness of findings
 such as the linkage between pneumonia and cookstoves.
 The use of qualitative methods combined with Photo-
 voice methodology therefore facilitated a deeper
 understanding of the health-­related concerns of CAPS
 participants. This highlighted the benefits of qualita-
 tive enquiry in foregrounding the health priorities of
 research participants and enhanced the credibility of the
 findings.
 
<section> CONCLUSION
 CAPS suggested that a cleaner burning biomass-­fuelled
 cookstove intervention alone would not prevent pneu-
 monia in young children in Malawi. However, CAPS trial
 participants made clear that a link between cookstoves
 and pneumonia ‘going away’ was established which
 may have detrimental impacts. This demonstrates the
 complexities of communicating intended trial outcomes
 and how these may potentially be misunderstood. The
 gulf between health understandings of researchers
 and CAPS participants was also evident from the unex-
 pected contribution to well-­being of timeliness and ‘not
 blowing’. In contexts such as Malawi, cookstoves are
 likely to continue to be part of the mix of clean energy
 solutions that will be necessary to achieve the SDGs.
 Gaining in-­ depth understanding through qualitative
 methods and participatory methodologies can help
 bridge the divide between cookstove implementors and
 users 58 and may ultimately contribute towards the devel-
 opment of approaches that enhance the health and well-­
 being of the billions of people exposed to HAP.
 
<section> Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of
 all study participants. The image shown in Figure 4 was taken by Photovoice
 participant Tomasi Kamphiripiri. This research would not have been possible
 without the support of Stephen Gordon and other MLW team members, especially
 CAPS fieldworkers Andrew Nuanje and Emma Nyirenda, and the Science
 Communication Team.
 
<section> Contributors JA, KM and RT conceived the study; JA and CK collected the data
 with guidance from RT, and support in the field from CN; JA analysed the data with
 guidance from KJ, RT and ND; JA wrote the manuscript with inputs from all authors
 who also approved the final submitted version.
 
<section> Funding This study was funded by the BREATHE-­Africa Partnership (grant number
 MR/L009242/1), jointly funded by the UK Medical Research Council (MRC) and
 the UK Department for International Development (DFID) under the MRC/DFID
 Concordat agreement, and the CAPS Joint Global Health Trials grant funded by the
 Wellcome Trust, MRC, Department of International Development UK (reference, MR/
 K006533/1). We thank the NIHR Global Health Research Unit on Lung Health and TB
 in Africa at LSTM—‘IMPALA’ for helping to make this work possible. In relation to
 
<section> IMPALA (grant number 16/136/35) specifically: IMPALA was commissioned by the
 National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Global Health Research (GHR) using
 UK aid from the UK Government. The views expressed in this publication are those
 of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health
 and Social Care.
 
<section> Competing interests None declared.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were not involved in
 the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.
 
<section> Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
 
<section> Data availability statement All data relevant to the study are included in the
 article or uploaded as supplemental information.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
 Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
 others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any
 purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given,
 and indication of whether changes were made. See: https://​creativecommons.​org/​
 licenses/​by/​4.​0/.
 
<section> ORCID iD
 
<section> Jane Ardrey http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0003-​4558-​5113
 
<section> REFERENCES
 1 World Health Organisation. Sustainable development goals for
 household energy, 2020. Available: https://www.​who.​int/​airpollution/​
 household/​sustainable-​development-​goals/​en/
 2 Health Effects Institute. State of global air 2019. Boston, 2019.
 3 Gordon SB, Bruce NG, Grigg J, et al. Respiratory risks from
 household air pollution in low and middle income countries. Lancet
 Respir Med 2014;2:823–60.
 4 National Statistical Office/Malawi and ICF. Malawi demographic and
 health survey 2015-­16. Zomba, Malawi: National Statistical Office
 and ICF, 2017.
 5 Schraufnagel DE, Balmes JR, Cowl CT, et al. Air pollution and
 noncommunicable diseases: a review by the forum of international
 respiratory societies' environmental Committee, part 1: the
 damaging effects of air pollution. Chest 2019;155:409–16.
 6 World Health Organisation. Pneumonia: key facts, 2020. Available:
 https://www.​who.​int/​news-​room/​fact-​sheets/​detail/​pneumonia
 7 Schraufnagel DE, Balmes JR, Cowl CT, et al. Air pollution and
 noncommunicable diseases: a review by the forum of international
 respiratory societies' environmental Committee, part 2: air pollution
 and organ systems. Chest 2019;155:417–26.
 8 Global alliance for clean Cookstoves. impact areas, 2017. Available:
 http://​cleancookstoves.​org/​impact-​areas
 9 Mortimer K, Ndamala CB, Naunje AW, et al. A cleaner burning
 biomass-­fuelled cookstove intervention to prevent pneumonia
 in children under 5 years old in rural Malawi (the cooking and
 pneumonia study): a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet
 2017;389:167–75.
 10 Greco G, Skordis-­Worrall J, Mkandawire B, et al. What is a good
 life? selecting capabilities to assess women's quality of life in rural
 Malawi. Soc Sci Med 2015;130:69–78.
 11 Molyneux CS, Wassenaar DR, Peshu N, et al. 'Even if they ask
 you to stand by a tree all day, you will have to do it (laughter).!':
 community voices on the notion and practice of informed consent
 for biomedical research in developing countries. Soc Sci Med
 2005;61:443–54.
 12 Fairhead J, Leach M, Small M. Where techno-­science meets
 poverty: medical research and the economy of blood in the Gambia,
 West Africa. Soc Sci Med 2006;63:1109–20. 
<section> 13 Phiri M, Gooding K, Nyirenda D, et al. "Not just dogs, but rabid
 dogs": tensions and conflicts amongst research volunteers in
 Malawi. Glob Bioeth 2018;29:65–80.
 14 Montgomery CM, Pool R. From ‘trial community’ to ‘experimental
 publics’: how clinical research shapes public participation. Crit
 Public Health 2017;27:50–62.
 15 Muela SH, Ribera JM, Mushi AK, et al. Medical syncretism with
 reference to malaria in a Tanzanian community. Soc Sci Med
 2002;55:403–13.
 16 Stanistreet D, Hyseni L, Puzzolo E, et al. Barriers and Facilitators
 to the Adoption and Sustained Use of Cleaner Fuels in Southwest
 
<section> Cameroon: Situating ‘Lay’ Knowledge within Evidence-­Based Policy
 and Practice. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2019;16:4702.
 17 Thurber MC, Warner C, Platt L, et al. To promote adoption of
 household health technologies, think beyond health. Am J Public
 Health 2013;103:1736–40.
 18 O'Cathain A, Thomas KJ, Drabble SJ, et al. What can qualitative
 research do for randomised controlled trials? A systematic mapping
 review. BMJ Open 2013;3:e002889.
 19 Rehfuess EA, Puzzolo E, Stanistreet D, et al. Enablers and barriers
 to large-­scale uptake of improved solid fuel stoves: a systematic
 review. Environ Health Perspect 2014;122:120–30.
 20 Debbi S, Elisa P, Nigel B, et al. Factors influencing household uptake
 of improved solid fuel stoves in low- and middle-­income countries:
 a qualitative systematic review. Int J Environ Res Public Health
 2014;11:8228–50.
 21 Crewe E, Axelby R. Hierarchies of knowledge. In: Anthropology and
 development: culture, morality and politics in a Globalised world.
 
<section> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012: 131–56.
 22 Wang C, Burris MA. Photovoice: concept, methodology, and
 use for participatory needs assessment. Health Educ Behav
 1997;24:369–87.
 23 Wang CC, Yi WK, Tao ZW, et al. Photovoice as a participatory health
 promotion strategy. Health Promot Int 1998;13:75–86.
 24 Wang CC. Photovoice: a participatory action research strategy
 applied to women's health. J Womens Health 1999;8:185–92.
 25 Wang CC, Pies CA. Family, maternal, and child health through
 photovoice. Matern Child Health J 2004;8:95–102.
 26 Bates MJ, Ardrey J, Mphwatiwa T, et al. Enhanced patient research
 participation: a Photovoice study in Blantyre Malawi. BMJ Support
 Palliat Care 2018;8:171–4.
 27 Zietz S, de Hoop J, Handa S. The role of productive activities in the
 lives of adolescents: Photovoice evidence from Malawi. Child Youth
 Serv Rev 2018;86:246–55.
 28 Adkins E, Tyler E, Wang J, et al. Field testing and survey evaluation
 of household biomass cookstoves in rural sub-­Saharan Africa.
 
<section> Energy Sustain Dev 2010;14:172–85.
 29 Ronzi S, Puzzolo E, Hyseni L, et al. Using photovoice methods as a
 community-­based participatory research tool to advance uptake of
 clean cooking and improve health: the LPG adoption in Cameroon
 evaluation studies. Soc Sci Med 2019;228:30–40.
 30 World Bank. World development report 2012: gender equality
 and development. In: Population and development review. ,
 
<section> 2012: 38, 178–9.
 31 McAllister DA, Liu L, Shi T, et al. Global, regional, and national
 estimates of pneumonia morbidity and mortality in children younger
 than 5 years between 2000 and 2015: a systematic analysis. Lancet
 Glob Health 2019;7:e47–57.
 32 Price AJ, Crampin AC, Amberbir A, et al. Prevalence of obesity,
 hypertension, and diabetes, and cascade of care in sub-­Saharan
 
<section> Africa: a cross-­sectional, population-­based study in rural and urban
 Malawi. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:208–22.
 33 Malawi-­Liverpool Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Centre.
 Chikwawa, 2019. Available: https://www.​mlw.​mw/​index.​php/​
 
<section> chikwawa.​html
 34 Ardrey J, Desmond N, Tolhurst R, et al. The cooking and pneumonia
 study (CAPS) in Malawi: a nested pilot of Photovoice participatory
 research methodology. PLoS One 2016;11): :e0156500.
 35 Crewe E. The silent traditions of developing cooks. In: Discourses
 of development : anthropological perspectives. Oxford, New York:
 Berg, 1997.
 
<section> 36 Krumpal I. Determinants of social desirability bias in sensitive
 surveys: a literature review. Qual Quant 2013;47:2025–47.
 
<section> 37 Lambe FS. Identifying behavioural drivers of cookstove use: a
 household study in Kibera. Nairobi: Stockholm Environment Institute,
 2015.
 38 Castleden H, Garvin T, Huu-­ay-­aht First Nation. Modifying
 Photovoice for community-­based participatory Indigenous research.
 
<section> Soc Sci Med 2008;66:1393–405.
 39 Wang C, Burris MA. Empowerment through photo novella: portraits
 of participation. Health Educ Q 1994;21:171–86.
 40 Nyirenda D, Sariola S, Gooding K, et al. 'We are the eyes and ears of
 researchers and community': understanding the role of community
 Advisory groups in representing researchers and communities in
 Malawi. Dev World Bioeth 2018;18:420–8.
 41 Fingleton-­Smith E. The lights are on but no (men) are home.
 The effect of traditional gender roles on perceptions of energy
 in Kenya. Energy Res Soc Sci 2018;40:211–9. doi:10.1016/j.
 
<section> erss.2018.01.006
 42 Braun VC. Using thematic analysis in psychology. In: Qualitative
 research in psychology. Routledge, 2006: 77–101.
 43 Simkovich SM, Williams KN, Pollard S, et al. A systematic review to
 evaluate the association between clean cooking technologies and
 time use in low- and middle-­income countries. Int J Environ Res
 Public Health 2019;16. doi:10.3390/ijerph16132277. [Epub ahead of
 print: 27 Jun 2019].
 44 Rewald R. Energy and Women and Girls Analyzing the Needs Uses
 and Impacts of Energy on Women and Girls in the Developing World.
 
<section> In: Oxfam research Backgrounder series. Oxfam, 2017. https://www.​
 
<section> oxfamamerica.​org/​explore/
 45 Cundale K, Thomas R, Malava JK, et al. A health intervention or
 a kitchen appliance? household costs and benefits of a cleaner
 burning biomass-­fuelled cookstove in Malawi. Soc Sci Med
 2017;183:1–10.
 46 Pool R, Geissler W. Medical systems and medical syncretism. In:
 Medical anthropology. England: Open University Press, 2005.
 47 Lock MM, Nguyen V-­K. Anthropologies of Medicine. In: An
 anthropology of biomedicine. Wiley-­Blackwell, 2010.
 48 Kleinman A. Patients and healers in the context of culture : an
 exploration of the borderland between anthropology, medicine, and
 psychiatry. In: Comparative studies of health systems and medical
 care. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.
 49 Ewing VL, Tolhurst R, Kapinda A, et al. Understanding interpretations
 of and responses to childhood fever in the Chikhwawa district of
 Malawi. PLoS One 2015;10:e0125439–18.
 50 Colvin CJ, Smith HJ, Swartz A, et al. Understanding careseeking
 for child illness in sub-­Saharan Africa: a systematic review and
 conceptual framework based on qualitative research of household
 recognition and response to child diarrhoea, pneumonia and malaria.
 
<section> Soc Sci Med 2013;86:66–78.
 51 Downie RS, Tannahill C, Tannahill A. Health promotion: models and
 values. 2 edn. Oxford medical publications, 1996.
 52 MBAULA. Why we need cookstoves, 2020. Available: http://www.​
 mbaula.​org/​about/​why-​we-​need-​cookstoves/
 53 Avotri JY, Walters V. "You just look at our work and see if you have
 any freedom on earth": Ghanaian women's accounts of their work
 and their health. Soc Sci Med 1999;48:1123–33.
 54 Bates MJ, Mphwatiwa T, Ardrey J, et al. Household concepts of
 wellbeing and the contribution of palliative care in the context of
 advanced cancer: a Photovoice study from Blantyre, Malawi. PLoS
 One 2018;13:e0202490.
 55 Meah A. Reconceptualizing power and gendered subjectivities in
 domestic cooking spaces. Prog Hum Geogr 2014;38:671–90.
 56 Catalani C, Minkler M. Photovoice: a review of the literature in health
 and public health. Health Educ Behav 2010;37:424–51.
 57 IEA, UNSD, World Bank, WHO. Tracking SDG 7: the energy progress
 report, 2020.
 58 McCarron A, Uny I, Caes L, et al. Solid fuel users' perceptions of
 household solid fuel use in low- and middle-­income countries: a
 scoping review. Environ Int 2020;143:105991.