
<section> To cite: Yang JE, Lassala D,
 Liu JX, et al. Effect of mobile
 application user interface
 improvements on minimum
 expected home visit coverage
 by community health workers
 in Mali: a randomised controlled
 
<section> trial. BMJ Global Health
 2021;6:e007205. doi:10.1136/
 
<section> bmjgh-2021-007205
 
<section> Handling editor Seye Abimbola
 
<section> ► Additional supplemental
 material is published online only.
 To view, please visit the journal
 online (http://​dx. d oi.​org/​10.​
 1136/ b mjgh-​2021- 07205).
 
<section> Received 17 August 2021
 Accepted 18 October 2021
 
<section> © Author(s) (or their
 employer(s)) 2021. Re-­use
 permitted under CC BY.
 Published by BMJ.
 For numbered affiliations see
 end of article.
 
<section> Correspondence to
 
<section> Jane E Yang;
 ​jemilieyang@​gmail. c om
 
<section> Effect of mobile application
 
<section> interface improvements
 
<section> expected home visit coverage
 
<section> community health workers
 
<section> randomised controlled
 
<section> Jane E Yang , 1 Diego Lassala , 2 Jenny
 Isaac Holeman , 4,5,6 Youssouf Keita, 2 Yasamba
 Sory Ibrahima N’Diaye, 2 Fatou Fall, 7 Kassoum
 
<section> ABSTRACT
 
<section> Background Proactive community case management
 (ProCCM) has shown promise to advance goals of universal
 health coverage (UHC). ProCCM community health workers
 (CHWs) face operational challenges when pursuing their
 goal of visiting every household in their service area at
 least twice monthly to proactively find sick patients. We
 developed a software extension (UHC Mode) to an existing
 CHW mobile application featuring user interface design
 improvements to support CHWs in planning daily home
 visits. We evaluated the effect of UHC Mode on minimum
 expected home visit coverage.
 
<section> Methods We conducted a parallel-­group, two-­arm
 randomised controlled trial of ProCCM CHWs in two
 separate regions in Mali. CHWs were randomly assigned
 to UHC Mode or the standard mobile application (control)
 with a 1:1 allocation. Randomisation was stratified by
 health catchment area. CHWs and other programme
 personnel were not masked to arm allocation. CHWs
 used their assigned intervention for 4 months. Using a
 difference-­in-­differences analysis, we estimated the mean
 change in minimum expected home visit coverage from
 preintervention to postintervention between arms.
 
<section> Results Enrolment occurred in January 2019. Of
 eligible CHWs randomised to the intervention or control
 arm, 196 were enrolled and 195 were included in the
 analysis. Households whose CHW used UHC Mode had
 2.41 times higher odds of minimum expected home visit
 coverage compared with households whose CHW used
 the control (95% CI 1.68 to 3.47; p<0.0005). Minimum
 expected home visit coverage in the UHC Mode arm
 increased 13.6 percentage points (95% CI 8.1 to 19.0)
 compared with the control arm.
 
<section> Conclusion Our findings suggest UHC Mode is an
 effective tool that can improve home visit coverage and
 promote progress towards UHC when implemented in
 the ProCCM context. User interface design of health
 information systems that supports health workers’ daily
 practices and meets their requirements can have a positive
 impact on health worker performance and home visit
 coverage.
 
<section> Trial registration number NCT04106921.
 
<section> user
 
<section> on minimum
 
<section> by
 
<section> in Mali: a
 
<section> trial
 
<section> X Liu , 3 Caroline Whidden ,
 
<section> Djiguiba,
 Kayentao , 2,8 Ari D Johnson 1,9
 
<section> Key questions
 
<section> What is already known?
 
<section> ► There are few published studies that have evaluat-
 ed the effect of digital user interface design inter-
 ventions on health worker performance or health
 service delivery in low-­income and middle-­income
 country settings.
 
<section> ► Most studies of user interface design have method-
 ological limitations and focus on qualitative surveys
 of the acceptability and usability of health informa-
 tion systems.
 
<section> ► This research gap is notable given existing strate-
 gies to improve service coverage and access to care
 through community health workers (CHWs), and
 considering CHWs may have more limited access to
 technical literacy training opportunities than is the
 norm among physicians and nurses.
 
<section> What are the new findings?
 
<section> ► This randomised controlled trial is one of the first to
 evaluate the effect of digital user interface design
 improvements on CHW performance, specifically
 minimum expected home visit coverage.
 
<section> ► Use of universal health coverage (UHC) Mode, a soft-
 ware extension to an existing mobile application for
 CHWs, resulted in an increase in minimum expected
 home visit coverage.
 
<section> ► Across two study areas, results were similarly posi-
 tive, though the separate analysis for the rural health
 catchment area was limited by its small sample size.
 
<section> INTRODUCTION
 Achieving universal health coverage (UHC),
 a critical sustainable development goal and
 a precursor to meeting other health-­related
 sustainable development goals such as ending
 preventable child and maternal deaths,
 requires monitoring population coverage of
 essential health services and attaining high 
<section> Key questions
 
<section> What do the new findings imply?
 
<section> ► As countries pursue their 2030 UHC goals, digitally supported CHWs
 can advance these goals at the local level.
 
<section> ► UHC Mode should be considered an effective tool that can improve
 minimum expected home visit coverage and promote progress to-
 wards UHC when implemented in the proactive community case
 management context.
 
<section> ► User interface design of health information systems that supports
 health workers in their daily practice and meets their requirements
 can have a positive impact on health worker performance and
 home visit coverage.
 
<section> rates of coverage and access. 1 To make progress towards
 UHC in sub-­Saharan Africa and improve child health and
 survival, many governments have implemented a strategy
 of community-­based service delivery known as integrated
 community case management (iCCM) via community
 health worker (CHW) programmes at varying levels of
 scale. 2 This strategy consists of the delivery of essential
 health services by trained health workers who live in the
 communities they serve. Although a range of studies
 show that CHWs can effectively deliver services, 3–5 many
 low-­income and middle-­income country (LMIC) settings
 have observed low coverage of home visits and other
 health services. 6–10
 Proactive CCM (ProCCM) is an alternative iCCM
 model that aims to increase coverage, speed and quality
 of health service delivery and improve maternal and child
 health outcomes. ProCCM CHWs integrate into existing
 health systems, receive monthly dedicated supervision,
 conduct active case-­finding home visits to all households
 in their service area, provide doorstep care free-­of-­charge
 to patients, and evacuate patients with danger signs to
 redesigned government primary care clinics. After
 promising findings from recent observational studies,
 ProCCM and the causal effects of proactive case detec-
 tion on access to care and child mortality are being eval-
 uated in rural Mali. 12 CHW workflow for service delivery,
 the effect of home visits on access to care, and ways to
 optimally support CHW performance remain research
 priorities in the community health field. 13–15
 Digital technologies such as mobile applications are
 recommended as a best practice for high-­functioning
 CHW programmes to improve the speed, quality and
 equity of CHW services via more timely and usable
 data. 16 Digital health interventions may increase adher-
 ence to case management guidelines, 17 18 increase time-
 liness of care, 19 and improve the effectiveness of CHW
 supervision. 15 Yet they also face complex implemen-
 tation challenges, including the need for better align-
 ment with health worker routines and interoperability
 with local infrastructure. 20 Poor accessibility of user
 interfaces may limit the benefits of health information
 systems and has been cited as a source of medical and
 user errors and health worker burnout. 21–23 There are
 still very few studies of the effects of improved user inter-
 face design on digitally supported care in LMICs. This
 gap is notable given existing strategies to improve service
 coverage and access to care through CHWs, and consid-
 ering CHWs may have more limited access to technical
 literacy training opportunities than is the norm among
 physicians and nurses.
 In a CHW programme in Mali, ProCCM CHWs are often
 each responsible for 100–200 households depending
 on the setting (rural or urban) and population density.
 Given their context-­specific knowledge of their communi-
 ties and responsibilities for triaging a wide array of tasks,
 including urgent patient evacuations, ProCCM CHWs
 maintain complete autonomy in determining their daily
 workflows (eg, the sequence of visiting households in the
 service area). Still, they face unique operational chal-
 lenges as they pursue meeting the programmatic goal of
 visiting every household in their service area at least twice
 monthly, including lack of functionality in their existing
 mobile application to monitor their progress and orga-
 nise their workflow. We developed a software extension
 (UHC Mode) to address these challenges by providing
 CHWs with real-­time data to support CHWs in planning
 their daily home visits. This study’s primary objective
 was to evaluate the effect of UHC Mode on minimum
 expected home visit coverage.
 
<section> METHODS
 Study design and participants
 We conducted a parallel-­ group, two-­ arm randomised
 controlled trial in the community setting in two health
 catchment areas in separate regions in Mali, from August
 2018 to July 2019 (see figure 1 for Consolidated Stand-
 ards of Reporting Trials diagram).
 CHWs in Tori and Yirimadio providing health services
 based on the ProCCM model were eligible. Although
 this study took place in a larger context of ProCCM care
 delivery, a full description of which is published else-
 where, 11 12 it is unrelated to the separate ProCCM trial.
 Tori, a rural area in the Mopti region in central Mali,
 had a population of 29 029 in 2019, while Yirimadio, a
 periurban area in Bamako, the nation’s capital, had an
 estimated population of 176 089. Both areas were each
 served by one public sector primary health centre at the
 time of the trial.
 Three CHWs delivering ProCCM in Yirimadio were
 randomly selected to pilot test UHC Mode before its
 launch. CHWs who did not provide written informed
 consent, or had to drop out of the study before inter-
 vention launch, or were involved in pilot testing, were
 excluded from the trial.
 Although additional secondary outcomes were orig-
 inally planned, these were dropped due to operational
 constraints and unforeseen challenges in study imple-
 mentation (described in the Data preparation section of
 online supplemental materials). 
<insert> Figure 1 Trial profile. CHWs, community health workers; UHC, 
<iend>

 
<section> 213 CHWs assessed
 
<section> Allocation 
<section> 199 randomized
 
<section> 100 allocated to UHC Mode
 
<section> Tori: 14 allocated 
<section> Yirimadio:
 to intervention 
<section> allocated to 3 not evrolled
 
<section> intervention
 
<section> Enrollment 
<section> 97 enrolled
 
<section> Tori: 14 enrolled 
<section> Yirimadio:
 
<section> Follow-Up 
<section> enrolled 1 lost to
 
<section> Analysis 96 included in analysis
 
<section> Tori: 13 analyzed 
<section> Yirimadio:
 analyzed
 
<section> Randomisation and masking
 Eligible CHWs not involved in pilot testing were
 randomly assigned to the control or UHC Mode arm
 with a 1:1 allocation using a computer-­generated random
 number. Randomisation was stratified by health catch-
 ment area, and performed by a research team member
 who was not involved in study recruitment. Due to oper-
 ational constraints, randomisation was done before study
 recruitment. The nature of UHC Mode precluded CHW
 participants, CHW supervisors and other study personnel
 from being masked to arm allocation. To avoid contam-
 ination, two training sessions were held before interven-
 tion launch: one for all eligible CHWs to discuss standard
 definitions of households and home visit protocols, and a
 second for CHWs randomised to UHC Mode, to provide
 an overview of its features, and discourage discussions
 about UHC Mode with CHWs in the control arm.
 
<section> Procedures and study period
 During the study period, eligible CHWs followed the
 standard ProCCM protocol: conduct home visits for a
 minimum of 2 hours per day, 6 days per week, in order to
 visit each household in their service area with the minimum
 expected frequency (at least twice monthly). 11 12 During
 their home visits, CHWs reinforced the importance of
 rapid care-­seeking and encouraged community members
 to call their mobile telephone number or visit them right
 away if their child became symptomatic. CHWs were
 expected to be on call to provide care outside of their
 regular home visiting hours.
 CHWs were also expected to register and maintain
 information on all households and patients in their
 service area and to document each home visit and sick
 
<section> for eligibility
 
<section> 14 ineligible
 
<section> 11 did not meet inclusion criteria
 3 pre-tested UHC Mode
 
<section> 99 allocated to control
 
<section> Tori: 13 allocated 
<section> Yirimadio:
 to control 
<section> allocated to
 
<section> control
 
<section> 99 enrolled
 
<section> Tori: 13 enrolled 
<section> Yirimadio:
 follow-up 
<section> enrolled 0 lost to follow-up
 
<section> 99 included in analysis
 
<section> Tori: 13 analyzed 
<section> Yirimadio:
 analyzed
 
<section> universal health coverage.
 
<section> patient evaluation using a CHW application preinstalled
 on Android phones. CHWs maintained autonomy and
 flexibility in planning their daily home visit workflows,
 including what order they visited households. Preinter-
 vention (baseline) was defined as August 2018 to March
 2019. In the latter half of preintervention (December
 2018–March 2019), a CHW Supervision Dashboard was
 implemented in both arms to enable dedicated CHW
 supervisors to monitor CHW performance indicators
 related to timeliness and quantity of monthly home visits
 and quality of care. 15 For 4 months postintervention
 (April–July 2019), eligible CHWs used their randomised
 intervention: the standard CHW application (control) or
 the CHW application with UHC Mode (intervention).
 UHC Mode was deployed in Yirimadio on 8 March 2019
 and in Tori on 13 March 2019.
 
<section> The intervention and control
 UHC Mode is an add-­ on (software extension) to the
 CHW application consisting of user interface design
 improvements to support CHWs to achieve their
 minimum expected home visit coverage of each house-
 hold in their service area each month. It features four
 main design elements: First, each household’s date of last
 visit is displayed on individual household profiles, which
 show households’ primary contact information and regis-
 tered members. This information is displayed on the
 household list as the time elapsed (in days or months)
 since the last home visit and colour coded red (if the
 date of last visit was 30 or more days ago) or black (if
 the date of last visit was fewer than 30 days ago). Second,
 red exclamation point icons appear on the household
 list to emphasise households with fewer than two visits in 
<insert> Figure 2 Display of information on the household list in the standard CHW application (A1–A2) versus UHC Mode (B1–B2)
 and on individual household profiles in the standard application (A3) versus UHC Mode (B3). A1 shows the household list
 in the standard CHW application. A2 shows the household list in the standard CHW application, with default alphabetical
 ordering. B1 shows the household list in UHC Mode, which displays the time elapsed in days since the last home visit (colour
 coded red if the date of last visit was 30 or more days ago, and black if the date of last visit was fewer than 30 days ago).
 Red exclamation point icons emphasise households with fewer than two visits in the month, and a modified traffic light colour
 scheme (red, orange, light blue) show households receiving zero, one, or two or more visits in the month. B2 shows the
 household list in UHC Mode, with default chronological ordering by date of last home visit. A3 shows an individual household
 profile in the standard CHW application. B3 shows an individual household profile in UHC Mode, with information about the
 date of last visit and the monthly home visit count. CHW, community health worker; UHC, universal health coverage. 
<iend>

 
<section> BMJ Global Health
 
<section> the month. Third, a modified traffic light colour scheme
 (red, orange, light blue) shows households receiving
 zero, one or two or more visits during the month. Finally,
 the default ordering of the household list was changed
 from alphabetical by name to chronological by least
 recent visit date (figure 2).
 UHC Mode was the result of an iterative, human-­centred
 design process, 20 which involved direct observations of
 CHWs planning their daily home visits, focus groups with
 CHWs and CHW supervisors to elicit feedback on design
 features to promote higher minimum expected home
 visit coverage, and months of iterative pilot testing to
 incorporate CHW feedback into prototype development.
 The initial prototype focused on redesigning the patient
 lists feature, which CHWs had identified in focus groups
 as a bottleneck to managing their daily home visit work-
 flows. Prototype development was informed by key user
 experience principles discussed in design literature :
 visibility, feedback and positive reinforcement. The aim
 was to increase the visibility of minimum expected home
 visit coverage information, to provide users with clear
 feedback whenever their actions had contributed to the
 goal of minimum expected home visit coverage, and to
 provide feedback in a way that positively reinforced prac-
 tices conducive to high coverage rates.
 The control was the standard CHW application used
 by all eligible CHWs before the study, which was built
 with the open-­ source Community Health Toolkit.
 Key features include job aids for each care protocol, a
 task list, a report tab summarising CHW performance
 related to predefined targets, and a patient list organ-
 ised by household, with access to patients’ longitudinal
 records. CHWs can organise their daily workflow using
 the task management, targets and patient list features, 
<section> and administer clinical care protocols with job aids at the
 point of care. The application is designed to work while
 offline and to sync data to a central server when connec-
 tivity is available.
 Important preconditions to UHC Mode’s successful
 implementation identified during pilot testing were
 incorporated into the CHW application by interven-
 tion launch and available to CHWs in both arms. These
 included faster application performance, and new func-
 tionality (household ‘muting’ forms) to enable CHWs to
 deactivate (and reactivate) households that moved from
 the CHW service area (temporarily or permanently),
 declined CHW services, or no longer required CHW
 services for other reasons.
 
<section> Data collection
 Data on home visits were collected using the CHW appli-
 cation preintervention and via the assigned intervention
 postintervention, and extracted more than 3 months
 after the study period. We counted a maximum of one
 visit per unique household per day, to reduce the poten-
 tial for report duplication. If a CHW recorded more
 than one visit for the same household on the same day,
 then only one of those visits was counted. Observations
 were included in the analysis if households were regis-
 tered and visits were conducted within the study period,
 and households were considered active (household still
 present based on household muting form information)
 for at least 2 days in the month. Data were prepared and
 analysed using Stata V.15 (Stata). Additional informa-
 tion on data sources and preparation are given in online
 
<section> supplemental appendix
 
<section> Outcomes
 
<section> We used a binary primary outcome variable, whether
 an individual household in the CHW service area had
 minimum expected home visit coverage (at least two
 home visits by the CHW) in the month.
 
<section> Statistical analysis
 The primary outcome measure was the mean change
 in minimum expected home visit coverage (defined as
 an individual household’s receipt of at least two visits in
 the month) from preintervention to postintervention
 between arms. We also calculated the service area coverage
 of minimum expected home visits (the percentage of
 households visited at least twice in a month) by arm
 and the unadjusted difference from preintervention to
 postintervention between arms.
 Study sample size was primarily determined by oper-
 ational constraints; all available ProCCM CHWs in Tori
 and Yirimadio were eligible for the study.
 We first performed a descriptive analysis to assess
 comparability between arms in terms of CHWs’ sociode-
 mographic characteristics, baseline service area coverage,
 actual household load and the wealth quintile distribu-
 tion among households in the service area. Calculation of
 actual household load (the number of active households
 in the CHW service area) was enabled by the household
 muting functionality incorporated into the CHW appli-
 cation in both arms by intervention launch. To allow
 sufficient time for CHWs to implement the functionality,
 we used the number of active households in the final
 month of the postintervention period and applied it to
 all earlier months, assuming this was constant during the
 study period. We next calculated the unadjusted differ-
 ence in CHW service area coverage from preintervention
 to postintervention between arms. Service area coverage
 was graphed to compare trends by arm and month, and
 preintervention versus postintervention. Comparisons
 were done with health catchment areas combined and
 stratified given that baseline service area coverage varied
 by health catchment area.
 To analyse the primary outcome measure and estimate
 UHC Mode’s effect on CHW coverage of a given house-
 hold in the service area with minimum expected home
 visits, we conducted a difference-­ in-­ differences anal-
 ysis using a logit model for panel data with CHW-­level
 
<section> random effects:
 
<section> 	﻿‍ Y hiam = α + β 1 T i + β 2 P m + β 3 T i ∗ P m + β 4 Z a + e hiam
 
<section> where Y is the log odds of coverage of minimum expected
 home visits observed for household h by CHW i in health
 catchment area a in month m; T is an indicator variable
 i
 
<section> for a CHW’s arm allocation; P is an indicator variable for
 m
 
<section> the postintervention period; Z is an indicator variable for
 a
 
<section> health catchment area; and e is the idiosyncratic error
 term. The β coefficient on the him interaction term, T *P ,
 3 i m
 
<section> estimates the difference-­in-­differences in the log odds
 of minimum expected home visit coverage, comparing
 the mean change (from preintervention to postinterven-
 tion) in the log odds of minimum expected home visit
 coverage in households whose CHW used UHC Mode
 versus the mean change in households whose CHW used
 the control. We used the margins command in Stata to
 estimate the absolute change in the predicted probabil-
 ities of minimum expected home visit coverage in the
 UHC Mode versus the control arm. SEs were clustered by
 CHW, the unit of randomisation. Sensitivity analyses were
 performed to check the robustness of our regression
 model to controlling for: month fixed effects (to account
 for any systematic variations over time); alternative defi-
 nitions of the preintervention period (ie, 4 months with
 the CHW Supervision Dashboard and dropping the tran-
 sition month when UHC Mode launched); and including
 zero home visit counts for households indicated by CHWs
 to be temporarily or permanently inactive (to account
 for bias from potential under-­reporting in the event that
 CHWs who used UHC Mode were more likely than CHWs
 who used the control to report inactive households).
 In additional exploratory analyses, we assessed differ-
 ences in intervention effects by health catchment
 area (Tori vs Yirimadio), levels of baseline service area
 coverage, and levels of actual household load. We also
 performed a subgroup analysis to evaluate whether UHC
 Mode improved minimum expected home visit coverage 
<insert> Table 1 CHW baseline characteristics
 UHC mode
 (n=96)
 Control
 (n=99)
 P
 value
 Age, years
 No of children
 32.0 (8.7)
 2.9 (2.1)
 33.0 (9.6)
 3.2 (2.3)
 0.46
 0.48
 Household size 6.4 (3.0) 6.2 (2.6) 0.60
 No of spoken languages 1.3 (0.8) 1.2 (0.6) 0.36
 0.27
 Sex
  Male 10 (10%) 6 (6%)
  Female 86 (90%) 93 (94%)
  Muslim 92 (96%) 95 (96%)
  Catholic 4 (4%) 2 (2%)
  Other 0 (0%) 2 (2%)
  Single 15 (16%) 15 (15%)
  Married/free union 76 (79%) 81 (82%)
  Divorced/widow/
 separated
 5 (5%) 3 (3%)
  Bambara 83 (86%) 88 (89%)
  French 7 (7%) 8 (8%)
  Sorai 6 (6%) 3 (3%)
  Yes 84 (88%) 87 (88%)
  No 12 (12%) 12 (12%)
 95 (99%)
 1 (1%)
 97 (98%)
 2 (2%)
 Religion
 0.26
 Marital status
 0.74
 Language
 0.56
 Has children
 0.94
 Went to school
  Yes
  No
 0.58
 Data are n (%) or mean (SD). Statistical tests were performed
 using a two-­sided t-­test of means for continuous variables and
 Pearson’s χ 2 test for categorical variables.
 CHW, community health worker; UHC, universal health coverage. 
<iend>

 of households in the poorest wealth quintile compared
 with richer households and potentially improved equity
 in service delivery. This subgroup analysis was limited to
 Tori because household wealth information was unavail-
 able for Yirimadio, and programme records showed that
 households in the poorest wealth quintile in Tori had
 significantly lower odds of minimum expected home visit
 coverage compared with households in higher wealth
 quintiles.
 For exploratory analyses, we repeated the overall main
 effects analysis, adding a three-­ way interaction term
 including one of the following: a dichotomous variable
 for health catchment area; a categorical indicator variable
 for baseline service area coverage quartiles; a categorical
 indicator variable for actual household load quintiles;
 or a categorical indicator variable for household wealth
 quintiles (Tori only). The percentile variables for base-
 line service area coverage and actual household load
 were calculated separately by health catchment area. We
 obtained household wealth quintile information for Tori
 by conducting a principal component analysis of house-
 hold survey data on household assets, 12 adapted from the
 Demographic and Health Survey.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement
 Design of the intervention was informed by engaging
 with, and soliciting input from, CHWs and CHW super-
 visors. Patients and the public were not directly involved
 in the study design, conduct, reporting or dissemina-
 tion plans of this research. The two study sites are long-
 standing operational research sites, where Muso and
 its partners have worked in close partnership with local
 communities for years. Muso began operational research
 to improve access to care, maternal health, and child
 survival in Yirimadio in 2005, and in Tori in 2016. In each
 area, Muso works closely with local Ministry of Health
 officials and community members via the Associations
 de Santé Communitaire, Community Health Associa-
 tions. These community partners have authorised Muso
 to conduct operational research related to ProCCM, and
 actively engage as partners in this research.
 
<section> RESULTS
 
<section> Of 213 CHWs assessed for eligibility, 199 were eligible and
 randomised to receive UHC Mode (n=100) or control
 (n=99) in early January 2019 (figure 1). Of eligible and
 randomised CHWs, 196 (97 UHC Mode, 99 control)
 were recruited in CHW meetings held 2 January 2019–16
 January 2019 (Yirimadio) and 25 January 2019–26
 January 2019 (Tori). Three eligible CHWs in Yirimadio
 randomised to UHC Mode were unable to attend the
 CHW meetings when study enrolment occurred due to
 health reasons. There were 195 CHWs (96 UHC Mode,
 99 control) included in this analysis; one CHW in Tori
 randomised to UHC Mode dropped out of the study
 before intervention launch due to health reasons.
 CHWs served a total of 45 873 unique households (4288
 in Tori, 41 585 in Yirimadio) during the study period.
 CHW sociodemographic and service provision character-
 istics at baseline are shown in tables 1 and 2.
 The mean cumulative number of households regis-
 tered, actual household load, and baseline service area
 coverage did not differ between arms, but did differ by
 health catchment area (table 2). In the UHC Mode arm,
 mean baseline service area coverage across CHWs was
 44.0% (SD=20.9%) in Yirimadio compared with 63.2%
 (SD=17.3%) in Tori; the mean number of cumulative
 households registered by CHWs was 239.8 (SD=83.7) in
 Yirimadio compared with 167.0 (SD=45.4) in Tori; and
 the mean actual household load was 196.8 (SD=67.0) in
 Yirimadio compared with 162.5 (SD=43.2) in Tori.
 The unadjusted difference in CHW service area
 coverage in the UHC Mode arm from preinterven-
 tion to postintervention was 15.5 (95% CI 9.8 to 21.2; 
<insert> Table 3 Percentage of households visited at least twice in a month by arm and preintervention and postintervention periods,
 and differences in differences from preintervention to postintervention between arms, with health catchment areas combined
 and stratified
 Preintervention* (August
 2018–March 2019)
 Postintervention* (Apri–July
 2019) DID % point change* DID OR†
 UHC mode Control
 (n=68 154) (n=67 364)
 UHC mode
 (n=52 562) DID (95% CI) P value OR (95% CI) P value
 Control
 (n=42 293)
 Households visited at least twice in a month
 Combined 43.1 (38.7, 39.5 (34.4, 44.8) 70.9 (64.7,
 47.7) 76.4)
 51.8 (45.2, 58.3) 15.5 (9.8 to
 21.2)
 <0.0005 2.41 (1.68 to
 3.47)
 <0.0005
 Yirimadio n=36 <0.0005 2.40 (1.66 to
 3.49)
 <0.0005
 Tori 0.23 0.098
 n=57 n=58 n=44
 40.9 (36.3–
 45.6)
 38.1 (32.7, 43.7) 68.6 (61.9,
 74.5)
 49.6 (42.7, 56.6)
 16.1 (10.2 to
 22.0)
 n=10
 61.5 (49.1,
 72.6)
 n=8884 n=7565
 52.6 (40.0, 64.8) 89.3 (81.7,
 94.0)
 n=5949
 70.4 (54.4, 82.5)
 10.0 (-­5.9 to
 25.9)
 3.31 (0.80 to
 13.67)
 All estimates are adjusted for clustering at the CHW level.
 *Preintervention and postintervention service area coverage and DID percentage point changes are unadjusted for covariates.
 †Estimates for a random effects panel regression, with a treatment indicator that takes value 0 for the control arm and value
 1 for the intervention arm. Combined estimates control for health catchment area.
 CHW, community health worker; DID, difference-­in-­differences; UHC, universal health coverage. 
<iend>

 
<insert> Table 2 Baseline service provision characteristics
 Cumulative household registrations UHC mode (n=96) Control (n=99) P value
  Overall
  Yirimadio
 230.0 (83.3)
 239.8 (83.7)
 240.4 (131.7)
 252.1 (136.6)
 0.51
 0.48
  Tori 167.0 (45.4) 162.8 (44.7) 0.82
  Overall 192.1 (65.2) 206.1 (103.9) 0.26
  Yirimadio 196.8 (67.0) 212.7 (108.8) 0.25
  Tori 162.5 (43.2) 162.5 (44.6) 1.0
  Overall 46.6 (21.4) 44.7 (21.3) 0.54
  Yirimadio
  Tori
 44.0 (20.9)
 63.2 (17.3)
 43.2 (21.1)
 54.7 (20.3)
 0.80
 0.26
 Household wealth quintile distribution UHC Mode (n=1719) Control (n=1782) P value
 Actual household load
 Service area coverage
  Quintile 1 (lowest)
  Quintile
 262 (15%)
 270 (16%)
 263 (15%)
 306 (17%)
  Quintile 342 (20%) 372 (21%)
  Quintile
  Quintile 5 (highest)
 414 (24%)
 431 (25%)
 405 (23%)
 436 (25%)
 0.64
 Data are mean (SD) or n (%).
 CHW, community health worker; UHC, universal health coverage. 
<iend>

 p<0.0005) percentage points higher than in the control
 arm (table 3).
 In the UHC Mode arm, baseline service area coverage
 was 43%, increasing to 71% postintervention. In the
 control arm, baseline service area coverage was 40%,
 increasing to 52% postintervention (table 3, figure 3).
 
<section> BMJ Global Health
 
<section> Households whose CHW used UHC Mode had 2.41
 times higher odds of minimum expected home visit
 coverage from preintervention to postintervention
 compared with households whose CHWs used the
 control (95% CI 1.68 to 3.47; p<0.0005) (table 3). On
 average, minimum expected home visit coverage in 
<insert> Figure 3 Monthly and preintervention versus
 postintervention CHW service area coverage of minimum
 expected home visits (percentage of households visited at
 least twice in a month), by arm, with health catchment areas
 combined (A) and stratified (B–C). Vertical blue dotted lines
 show the formal start of the postintervention period. Gray-­
 shaded areas show the roll-­out of UHC Mode in March 2019.
 CHWs, community health workers; UHC, universal health
 coverage. 
<iend>

 the UHC Mode arm increased 13.6 percentage points
 (95% CI 8.1 to 19.0) compared with the control arm.
 The odds of minimum expected home visit coverage
 significantly increased in both arms from preinterven-
 tion to postintervention (OR 1.88, 95% CI 1.54 to 2.30;
 p<0.0005). In both health catchment areas, households
 whose CHW used UHC Mode had increased odds of
 minimum expected home visit coverage compared with
 households whose CHW used the control; however, the
 effect was only statistically significant in the larger health
 catchment area (Yirimadio: OR 2.40; 95% CI 1.66 to
 3.49; p<0.0005 and Tori: OR=3.31; 95% CI 0.80 to 13.67;
 p=0.098) (table 3). We found no difference in the effect
 of UHC Mode by health catchment area (online supple-
 mental appendix 3).
 The effect of UHC Mode on minimum expected home
 visit coverage was significantly greater for households whose
 intervention CHW had the highest baseline service area
 coverage (>75th percentile) vs households whose interven-
 tion CHW had lower baseline service area coverage (25th
 to <75th percentile) (OR=3.28; 95% CI 1.30 to 8.26; p=0.012)
 (table 4 and online supplemental appendix 3).
 There were no differences in UHC Mode’s effect by actual
 household load (online supplemental appendix 4). In Tori,
 UHC Mode had a larger effect on minimum expected home
 visit coverage of households in the middle wealth quintile
 compared with those in the poorest and richest wealth quin-
 tiles, but estimated effects across quintiles were not signifi-
 cantly different from each other (table 4).
 In sensitivity analyses, estimated effects of UHC Mode
 were robust to accounting for month fixed effects, alter-
 native definitions of the preintervention period, and
 including zero home visit counts for inactive households
 (online supplemental appendix 2).
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 
<section> Use of UHC Mode more than doubled the odds of, and
 increased by 13 percentage points, minimum expected
 home visit coverage. Across two study areas, results were
 similarly positive, and suggest that UHC Mode was effec-
 tively designed for use across both types of settings.
 Service area coverage of minimum expected home visits
 was consistently lower in the periurban versus the rural
 area during the study period. There are several possible
 explanations for this observation. First, due to rapid
 population growth and mixed migration dynamics in
 Bamako, 27 maintaining accurate household registrations
 in the CHW application is more challenging for CHWs in
 the periurban area; this was the primary impetus that led
 to the development of the household muting form func-
 tionality. Although this functionality supports CHWs to
 maintain more accurate lists of active households in their
 service area, it still requires additional work to implement.
 Second, mean actual household load was higher in the
 periurban area vs the rural. Lastly, we suspect that family
 cohabitation structures in the rural area, where multiple
 related families reside together in a larger structural unit,
 were likely to be more conducive to conducting efficient
 home visits compared with the periurban area.
 Although measures were taken to minimise potential
 contamination between study arms, which would bias results
 toward finding a null effect, positive spillover effects could
 have occurred between arms due to the nature of 360 Super-
 vision : UHC Mode and control CHWs shared supervisors,
 attended weekly group supervision sessions where they
 discussed common challenges and potential solutions, and
 received performance feedback via a CHW Supervision
 Dashboard featuring comparative metrics that may have
 promoted competition between CHWs. Although CHWs
 were informed during study recruitment that intervention 
<insert> Table 4 Exploratory analyses assessing differential effects of UHC Mode by baseline CHW service area coverage and
 household wealth (Tori only)
 Minimum expected home visit coverage
 OR 95% CI P value
 Differential effects by CHW baseline service area coverage
  Treatment x post x CHW performance quartile
  <25th percentile 1.59 (0.73 to 3.43) 0.24
  25th to <75th percentile (ref) – – –
  ≥75th percentile 3.28 (1.30 to 8.26) 0.012
 Differential effects by household wealth (Tori only)
  Treatment × post × household wealth quintile
  <20th percentile 0.46 (0.20 to 1.06) 0.069
  20th to <40th percentile 0.47 (0.17 to 1.31) 0.15
  40th to <60th percentile (ref) – – –
  60th to <80th percentile
  ≥80th percentile
 0.39
 0.43
 (0.18 to 0.82)
 (0.18 to 1.06)
 0.013
 0.067
 Overall main effects model with the addition of a three-­way interaction term.
 CHW, community health worker; UHC, universal health coverage. 
<iend>

 assignment was not based on CHW performance, competi-
 tion may still have influenced CHW behaviours, as previously
 reported.
 The temporal increase in minimum expected home visit
 coverage observed in both arms was likely due to software
 improvements made to both UHC Mode and control inter-
 ventions by intervention launch, which included faster appli-
 cation performance and the ability for CHWs to temporarily
 or permanently inactivate households when they move from
 the service area. The household muting functionality was
 relevant given mixed migration in periurban Yirimadio and
 population movement in rural Tori, where violent conflict
 was an emerging issue. 27
 UHC Mode had different effects on minimum expected
 home visit coverage depending on CHW baseline service
 area coverage. UHC Mode’s effects were strongest for
 households whose CHW had the highest baseline service
 area coverage (>75th percentile). Although CHWs pilot
 testing UHC Mode were randomly selected, CHW selec-
 tion and participation in focus groups and prototype
 development were biased toward the highest performers.
 Future product development should consider engaging
 more CHWs across the performance spectrum during
 prototype development and pilot testing. Lower-­
 performing CHWs may also need more comprehensive
 support extending beyond a software tool. This under-
 scores the importance of other critical programmatic
 strategies to address CHW performance disparities.
 Previous programme records of the small area of Tori iden-
 tified an important equity gap in minimum expected home
 visit coverage of households in the poorest wealth quintile,
 and we explored whether UHC Mode had any potential
 equity-­enhancing effect. A subgroup analysis showed UHC
 Mode had similar effects in the poorest and richest house-
 hold wealth quintiles, but this result was inconsistent across
 
<section> BMJ Global Health
 
<section> wealth quintiles and thus inconclusive. UHC Mode was
 not specifically designed to improve equity in minimum
 expected home visit coverage by household socioeconomic
 status. Further research and product development may test
 approaches to build on UHC Mode’s core design principles
 to identify and visually emphasise households considered
 more vulnerable within household lists.
 Although this study’s results did not show that the effect
 of UHC Mode differed by actual household load, our
 analysis had limited ability to evaluate the impact of actual
 household load on minimum expected home visit coverage
 over time. The household muting functionality was imple-
 mented in both arms postintervention and CHWs required
 time to implement the feature. Measurement of actual
 household load over time was thus limited and subject to
 error. Our assumption that household loads were constant
 during the study period was flawed given mixed migration
 and population displacement that impacted study areas
 during the study period. 27 28 The effect of UHC Mode is
 likely limited when the CHW-­ population ratio becomes
 unmanageable. Routine assessment and mapping of
 service areas to maintain optimal CHW-­population ratios
 is important for preventing excessive workloads, which may
 result in decreased CHW motivation and performance. 29
 This study has certain limitations resulting from challenges
 in conducting operational research. The small sample size at
 Tori resulted in this site being underpowered. In addition,
 this study relied on CHWs to accurately and systematically
 record home visits, use the household muting functionality,
 and manage household registrations in the CHW application
 including registering new households in the service area.
 Although monthly audits of home visits were conducted by
 CHW supervisors (via in-­person visits of randomly selected
 households as part of routine supervision) and study
 personnel (via telephone-­based audits of randomly selected 
<section> households to verify home visits and deactivations of house-
 holds), audits were not systematically done for all CHWs. It
 is likely that calculations of service area coverage over time
 were subject to some measurement error. It was not possible
 to mask CHW participants and other programme personnel
 to arm allocation, which may have led to bias by supervisors
 and/or CHWs altering their behaviour. CHWs who used
 UHC Mode may have been less likely than CHWs who used
 the control to register new households, which would result
 in an overestimate of UHC Mode’s effect. The 4-­ month
 duration of the postintervention period was also relatively
 brief. Future research should evaluate whether UHC Mode
 can sustain improvements in minimum expected home visit
 coverage over a longer duration.
 This study also has strengths that support its internal
 validity and potential generalisability. The nature of the
 intervention ensured CHWs adhered to their interven-
 tion assignment, and few CHWs were lost to follow-­up.
 Positive results were observed across two study areas,
 one rural and one periurban, in different regions of the
 country. This study also featured a rigorous study meth-
 odology: a randomised design, which enhanced compa-
 rability between arms and minimised confounding and
 selection bias, and a difference-­ in-­ differences analysis,
 which controlled for any potential baseline differences
 between arms despite randomisation.
 UHC Mode is a complement to, and not a substitute
 for, other important design elements of community
 health programmes, such as performance management
 and manageable CHW-­ population ratios. 14 16 While
 our findings are contextually dependent on ProCCM,
 it is possible that UHC Mode may have similar positive
 effects in other areas of application requiring CHW
 follow-­ up, such as multiple-­ dose mass vaccination
 campaigns, prenatal care, and treatment of malnutrition
 or tuberculosis.
 
<section> CONCLUSION
 As countries pursue their 2030 UHC goals, digitally
 supported CHWs can advance these goals at the local
 level. This trial is one of the first to test the effect of
 digital user interface design improvements on CHW
 performance, specifically minimum expected home
 visit coverage. Use of UHC Mode resulted in an increase
 in minimum expected home visit coverage. UHC
 Mode should be considered an effective tool that can
 improve minimum expected home visit coverage and
 promote progress towards UHC when implemented in
 the ProCCM context. Our positive results suggest that
 user interface design of health information systems that
 supports health workers in their daily practice and meets
 their requirements can have a positive impact on CHW
 performance and home visit coverage. In addition, the
 design and evaluation of community health information
 systems and tools that better support such operational
 tasks is a promising area of future research.
 
<section> Author affiliations
 
<section> Muso, San Francisco, California, USA
 
<section> Muso, Bamako, Mali
 Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, University of California San
 Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA
 Medic, San Francisco, California, USA
 Department of Human Centered Design & Engineering, University of Washington,
 
<section> Seattle, Washington, USA
 Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
 
<section> Medic, Dakar, Senegal
 Malaria Research & Training Centre, University of Sciences Techniques and
 
<section> Technologies, Bamako, Mali
 Department of Medicine, Institute for Global Health Sciences, University of
 California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
 
<section> Twitter Jane E Yang @jemilieyang, Isaac Holeman @isaacholeman, Sory Ibrahima
 N’Diaye @sory_diaye and Ari D Johnson @musohealth
 
<section> Acknowledgements The study authors would like to acknowledge the CHWs
 and CHW supervisors in Tori and Yirimadio for their contributions to developing
 the UHC Mode prototype, participation in the study, and their continued service to
 their communities. We thank the Muso programme and training and innovation
 teams for their role in implementing UHC Mode, and Dr Awa Sidibe and the Muso
 research team for their role in obtaining ethical approval, and administering
 informed consent and the CHW demographic survey. We are grateful to Marème
 Soda Gaye and the Medic team for their role in designing UHC Mode and to
 Amanda Yembrick for her role in the design of UHC Mode, obtaining funding, and
 providing project administrative and technical support. We thank the Community
 Health Center clinical teams and the communities in Tori and Yirimadio for their
 collaboration.
 
<section> Contributors CW, DL, IH, JEY, JXL, KK and YK had a role in the concept of the
 study. FF and IH designed UHC Mode with input from DL, JEY, SIN’D, YD and YK.
 CW, DL, and KK sought ethical approval. DL oversaw study implementation. CW,
 DL, JEY, and JXL had a role in developing study methodology and the analysis plan.
 JEY extracted, managed, analysed and interpreted the quantitative data with input
 from AJ, CW, DL, JXL, KK, YD and YK. JEY and DL verified the data analyses. JEY
 wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and critically revised
 the manuscript and approved the final version to be published. AJ and IH obtained
 funding. All authors provided administrative, technical and material support. AJ,
 CW, DL, FF, IH and YK supervised. JEY is the guarantor.
 
<section> Funding This study was funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
 
<section> Competing interests AJ, CW, DL, JEY, KK, SIN’D, YD and YK are employed
 by the non-­profit organisation, Muso. The Muso team designed the Proactive
 Community Case Management approach. FF and IH are employed by the
 non-­profit organisation, Medic. The Medic team serves as lead developer of the
 Community Health Toolkit open source project. Both Medic and Muso participated
 in the development of UHC Mode, as described in the manuscript. Both the CHT
 and UHC Mode are public goods to be made available open-­source. All authors
 have completed the Unified Competing Interest form at http://www.​icmje.​org/​
 downloads/​coi_​disclosure.​docx (available on request from the corresponding
 author) and declare no other conflicts of interest.
 
<section> Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
 
<section> Ethics approval Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval was obtained from
 the University of Sciences, Techniques, and Technologies of Bamako, Faculté de
 Médecine, de Pharmacie et d’Odonto-­Stomatologie Ethical Committee (Reference
 
<section> # 2018/186/CE/FMPOS).
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
 
<section> Data availability statement Data are available on reasonable request.
 Investigators agree to share deidentified individual participant data, the study
 protocol, statistical analysis plan and analytical code (Stata) 6 months after
 publication and following the completion of a data use agreement. Proposals
 should be directed to ​info@​musohealth.​org.
 
<section> Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has
 not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been
 peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those
 of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and
 responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content
 includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability
 of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
<section> terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error
 and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
 Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
 others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any
 purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given,
 and indication of whether changes were made. See: https://​creativecommons.​org/​
 licenses/​by/​4. /.
 
<section> ORCID iDs
 
<section> Jane E Yang http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0001- 083-​6319
 Diego Lassala http:// o rcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​0976-​8417
 Jenny X Liu http:// o rcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​3929-​0135
 Caroline Whidden http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0003-​0570-​4632
 Isaac Holeman http://​orcid.​org/ 000-​0002-​9072-​4162
 Kassoum Kayentao http:// o rcid.​org/​0000-​0001-​6877-​0093
 Ari D Johnson http://​orcid.​org/ 000-​0002-​7048-​5467
 
<section> REFERENCES
 1 Hogan DR, Stevens GA, Hosseinpoor AR, et al. Monitoring universal
 health coverage within the sustainable development goals:
 development and baseline data for an index of essential health
 services. Lancet Glob Health 2018;6:e152–68.
 2 Rasanathan K, Muñiz M, Bakshi S, et al. Community case
 management of childhood illness in sub-­Saharan Africa - findings
 from a cross-­sectional survey on policy and implementation. J Glob
 Health 2014;4:020401.
 3 Lewin S, Munabi-­Babigumira S, Glenton C, et al. Lay health workers
 in primary and community health care for maternal and child health
 and the management of infectious diseases. Cochrane Database
 Syst Rev 2010:CD004015.
 4 Okwundu CI, Nagpal S, Musekiwa A, et al. Home- or community-­
 based programmes for treating malaria. Cochrane Database Syst
 Rev 2013:CD009527.
 5 Lassi ZS, Bhutta ZA. Community-­Based intervention packages
 for reducing maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality and
 improving neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
 2015:CD007754.
 6 Guenther T, Nsona H, Makuluni R, et al. Home visits by community
 health workers for pregnant mothers and newborns: coverage
 plateau in Malawi. J Glob Health 2019;9.
 7 Tesfau YB, Kahsay AB, Gebrehiwot TG, et al. Postnatal home visits
 by health extension workers in rural areas of Ethiopia: a cross-­
 sectional study design. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2020;20:305.
 8 Munos M, Guiella G, Roberton T, et al. Independent evaluation of the
 rapid scale-­up program to reduce Under-­Five mortality in Burkina
 Faso. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2016;94:584–95.
 9 Amouzou A, Hazel E, Shaw B, et al. Effects of the integrated
 community case management of childhood illness strategy on child
 mortality in Ethiopia: a cluster randomized trial. Am J Trop Med Hyg
 2016;94:596–604.
 10 Sitrin D, Guenther T, Murray J, et al. Reaching mothers and babies
 with early postnatal home visits: the implementation realities
 of achieving high coverage in large-­scale programs. PLoS One
 2013;8:e68930.
 11 Johnson AD, Thiero O, Whidden C, et al. Proactive community case
 management and child survival in periurban Mali. BMJ Glob Health
 2018;3:e000634.
 12 Whidden C, Treleaven E, Liu J, et al. Proactive community case
 management and child survival: protocol for a cluster randomised
 controlled trial. BMJ Open 2019;9:e027487.
 
<section> 13 Whidden C, Thwing J, Gutman J, et al. Proactive case detection
 of common childhood illnesses by community health workers: a
 systematic review. BMJ Glob Health 2019;4:e001799.
 14 World Health Organization. WHO guideline on health policy and
 system support to optimize community health worker programmes,
 2018.
 15 Whidden C, Kayentao K, Liu JX, et al. Improving community health
 worker performance by using a personalised feedback dashboard
 for supervision: a randomised controlled trial. J Glob Health
 2018;8:020418.
 16 Ballard M, Bonds M, Burey J. CHW AIM: updated program
 functionality matrix for optimizing community health programs.
 community health impact coalition, 2018. Available: https://​static1.​
 squarespace.​com/​static/​5a05​07ca​6f4c​a346​d3a11552/​t/​5c10​
 f3f2​4d7a​9cec​045e0284/​1544614899673/​CHW+​AIM+​Updated+​
 Program+​Functionality+​Matrix_​Dec-​2018.​pdf [Accessed 19 Feb
 2021].
 17 Keitel K, D'Acremont V. Electronic clinical decision algorithms
 for the integrated primary care management of febrile children in
 low-­resource settings: review of existing tools. Clin Microbiol Infect
 2018;24:845–55.
 18 Zurovac D, Sudoi RK, Akhwale WS, et al. The effect of mobile phone
 text-­message reminders on Kenyan health workers’ adherence to
 malaria treatment guidelines: a cluster randomised trial. Lancet
 2011;378:795–803.
 19 DeRenzi B, Findlater L, Payne J. Improving community health
 worker performance through automated SMS. In: Proceedings of
 the fifth International Conference on information and communication
 technologies and development. New York, NY, USA: Association for
 
<section> Computing Machinery, 2012: 25–34.
 20 Holeman I, Kane D. Human-­centered design for global health equity.
 
<section> Inf Technol Dev 2020;26:477–505.
 21 Ash JS, Berg M, Coiera E. Some unintended consequences
 of information technology in health care: the nature of patient
 care information system-­related errors. J Am Med Inform Assoc
 2004;11:104–12.
 22 Middleton B, Bloomrosen M, Dente MA, et al. Enhancing patient
 safety and quality of care by improving the usability of electronic
 health record systems: recommendations from AMIA. J Am Med
 Inform Assoc 2013;20:e2–8.
 23 Gardner RL, Cooper E, Haskell J, et al. Physician stress and burnout:
 the impact of health information technology. J Am Med Inform Assoc
 2019;26:106–14.
 24 Wasunna B, Holeman I, Geniets A. Digital health interventions
 for community health worker training, ongoing education, and
 supportive supervision: Insights from a human-­centered design
 approach. In: Training for community health: bridging the global
 health care gap. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2021: 1–71.
 
<section> 25 Norman DA. The design of everyday things. revised and expanded
 editon. Cambridge, MA, London: The MIT Press, 2013:
 26 Community Health Toolkit. Community health toolkit. Available:
 https://​comm​unit​yhea​ltht​oolkit.​org [Accessed 15 Feb 2021].
 27 Urban Mixed Migration. Mixed migration centre. Available: http://
 www.​mixedmigration.​org/​resource/​urban-​case-​study-​bamako/
 [Accessed 16 Feb 2021].
 28 Human Rights Watch. 'How much more blood must be spilled?',
 2020. Available: https://www.​hrw.​org/​report/​2020/​02/​11/​how-​much-​
 more-​blood-​must-​be-​spilled/​atrocities-​against-​civilians-​central-​mali
 [Accessed 16 Feb 2021].
 29 Bhattacharyya K, Winch P, LeBan K. Community health worker
 incentives and Disincentives: how they affect motivation, retention
 and sustainability, 2001. Available: https://​pdf.​usaid.​gov/​pdf_​docs/​
 PNACQ722.​pdf [Accessed 18 Feb 2021].
 30 Pallas SW, Minhas D, Pérez-­Escamilla R, et al. Community
 health workers in low- and middle-­income countries: what do we
 know about scaling up and sustainability? Am J Public Health
 2013;103:e74–82.