
<section> Human-­centred design
 
<section> confidence in the Philippines:
 
<section> a randomised controlled
 
<section> Mark Donald C Reñosa , 1,2 Jonas Wachinger
 Jhoys Landicho-­Guevarra, 2 Mila F Aligato,
 Jeniffer Landicho , 2 Thea Andrea Bravo,
 Maria Paz Demonteverde, 2 Catherine Silvestre,
 Till Bärnighausen , 1,4 Rachel P Chase
 
<section> To cite: Reñosa MDC, 
<section> ABSTRACT
 Wachinger J, Guevarra JR, Background The public’s confidence in vaccinations has
 et al. Human-­centred design eroded, and anti-­vaccination movements have gained traction
 bolsters vaccine confidence around the world, including in the Philippines. ‘Salubong’, a
 
<section> in the Philippines: results
 Filipino term, refers to welcoming someone back into one’s
 
<section> of a randomised controlled
 trial. BMJ Glob Health life and elicits ideas about friendship and family relationships.
 2023;8:e012613. doi:10.1136/ We extended this concept to vaccines in efforts to design an
 bmjgh-2023-012613 intervention that would re-­welcome vaccines into homes.
 
<section> Methods Using human-­centred design, we developed and
 
<section> Handling editor Valery Ridde refined a story-­based intervention that engages Filipino
 families, community leaders and community health workers.
 
<section> ► Additional supplemental We conducted a randomised controlled trial among
 material is published online only. caregivers of small children to test the developed intervention
 To view, please visit the journal against a control video. We assessed the binary improvement
 
<section> online (http://​dx. d 
<section> oi.​org/​10.​
 (improvement vs no improvement) and the amount of
 1136/ b mjgh-​2023- 12613).
 improvement in vaccine attitudes and intentions after
 intervention exposure.
 RPC and SAM are joint senior Results Although the intervention group began with marginally
 authors. higher baseline vaccine attitude scores, we found that 62% of
 the intervention group improved their vaccine attitude scores
 Received 18 April 2023 versus 37% of the control group (Fisher’s exact, p<0.001).
 Accepted 22 September 2023 Among individuals whose scores improved after watching
 the assigned video, the intervention group saw higher mean
 attitude score improvements on the 5-­point scale (Cohen’s
 d=0.32 with 95% CI 0.10 to 0.54, two-­sided t-­test, p<0.01).
 We observed similar patterns among participants who stated
 that they had previously delayed or refused a vaccine for
 their child: 67% of 74 in the intervention group improved
 their vaccine attitude scores versus 42% of 54 in the control
 group (Fisher’s exact, p<0.001). Among the subset of these
 individuals whose scores improved after watching the assigned
 video, the intervention group saw higher mean attitude score
 improvements on the 5-­point scale that were marginally
 significant (Cohen’s d=0.35 with 95% CI −0.01 to 0.70, two-­
 sided t-­test, p=0.06).
 
<section> © Author(s) (or their Conclusions Our results provide solid evidence for the
 employer(s)) 2023. Re-­use potential of co-­designed vaccine confidence campaigns
 permitted under CC BY. and regulations.
 Published by BMJ.
 
<section> For numbered affiliations see
 end of article.
 
<section> INTRODUCTION
 
<section> Correspondence to
 Dr Mark Donald C Reñosa; The need for interventions and products that
 
<section> ​drmarkdonaldrn@​gmail.​com are personalised to human experiences and
 
<section> bolsters vaccine
 
<section> results of
 
<section> trial
 
<section> , 1 Jerric Rhazel Guevarra,
 2 Vivienne Endoma ,
 2 Carol Malacad,
 2 Kate Bärnighausen , 1,3
 
<section> , 1,5 Shannon A McMahon 1,6
 
<section> WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN IN THIS TOPIC
 
<section> ⇒ Vaccine hesitancy can have serious public health
 consequences, as it can lead to outbreaks of
 vaccine-­preventable diseases, particularly in coun-
 tries with low vaccination rates.
 
<section> ⇒ Concerns about the safety and effectiveness of
 vaccinations, including misinformation, mistrust
 of healthcare workers or pharmaceutical compa-
 nies, religious or philosophical convictions and
 fear of side effects are all potential causes of
 vaccine hesitancy.
 
<section> ⇒ While human-­ centred design (HCD) has proven
 beneficial in several health campaigns, evidence
 regarding whether, how or to what effect HCD can
 be used to bolster vaccination confidence in low and
 middle-­income countries is lacking.
 
<section> WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
 
<section> ⇒ We designed and refined a story-­based intervention
 that involves Filipino families (especially those who
 are vaccine-­hesitant), community leaders and com-
 munity health workers using HCD.
 
<section> ⇒ Our findings highlighted the potential of real-­life narra-
 tives in developing and honing an intervention rooted in
 the local context.
 
<section> ⇒ Our HCD-­ d riven intervention boosts vaccine
 confidence and increases positive feelings about
 vaccines. We thereby reinforce the importance
 of HCD as a method of meaning-­making that af-
 fects attitudes and behavioural intent in relation
 to vaccinations.
 
<section> HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH,
 
<section> PRACTICE OR POLICY
 
<section> ⇒ Time, vulnerability and volatility (ie, roller-­
 coaster emotions) elements of vaccine hesitancy
 emphasise the necessity of integrating context
 and ongoing public sentiments into interventions
 targeted at promoting vaccine confidence.
 
<section> ⇒ Additional and larger-­scale research is warranted,
 particularly concerning vaccine messaging revital-
 isation in a time of pervasive disinformation and with
 vaccine uptake outcomes in addition to intentions. 
<section> their cultural and environmental contexts is increasingly
 recognised. Human-­centred design (HCD) has gained
 popularity in the field of global health as a means to
 co-­create and rapidly assess products and services. 1 2 HCD
 engages intended end-­users in the design process and
 encourages implementers to be guided by empathy when
 developing applied solutions. 1 In prioritising end-­user
 insights and engaging with end-­users throughout design
 ideation and iterations, HCD cultivates a sense of equity.
 Several studies have demonstrated the value of
 HCD in fostering cultural sensitivity and local adapt-
 ability. 4–8 HCD-­ driven breastfeeding interventions in
 South Africa, for example, emphasised the relevance of
 stories and personal experiences, as well as leveraging
 local talents and expertise (ie, elements of local voices
 and music) to resonate across ethnic and socioeco-
 nomic groups. 5 8 The development of a maternal nutri-
 tion video in Burkina Faso involved modifying images
 related to climate, language, food, household structures
 and socioeconomic position of end-­users and health-
 care professionals as a means to enhance relatability. 6
 In India, HCD was used to generate digital health solu-
 tions (eg, mobile messaging service) for long-­ term
 health system integration to address maternal and child
 health in the country. 9 Additionally, several HCD-­driven
 interventions have focused on the use of straightfor-
 ward storylines and journey maps when designing prod-
 ucts. 4
 As vaccine hesitancy constitutes a significant threat to
 global health, 11 HCD has proven to be beneficial in devel-
 oping vaccine promotion material. 12–16 Examples include
 development of user-­ centred mobile applications to
 educate parents on child vaccination and vaccine safety
 communication strategies in Germany, 13 16 paediatric
 vaccination modules for patients in Argentina 14 and clin-
 ical guidelines to improve healthcare providers’ recom-
 mendations in the USA. 15 Some less-­ resource settings
 have also started to incorporate HCD principles into
 their work, such as the development of educational mate-
 rials and interactive elements to engage parents in South
 Africa and Burkina Faso, 4–8 hospital-­based vaccine docu-
 mentation strategies in Kenya 10 and digital interventions
 in India. 9 12 Existing vaccine confidence interventions
 employing HCD rely heavily on health-­system approaches
 and advocate for improved healthcare environments. 12–16
 While HCD-­driven interventions have yielded prom-
 ising results in terms of increasing vaccine confidence and
 uptake, their scope did not always acknowledge vaccine-­
 hesitant families’ own lived experiences and narratives.
 Several authors have argued about the importance of
 tailoring health interventions based on vaccination
 concerns and experiences, and aligning interventions
 to fit cultural and environmental contexts. 17 18 More
 recently, authors have also highlighted a need to address
 hesitancies rooted in alternative health beliefs, political
 polarisation or belief-­ based extremism reinforced by
 digital media platforms. 18 Additionally, despite increasing
 in recent years, scholarship from low and middle-­income
 countries on employing HCD for the development of
 vaccine confidence interventions remains limited.
 To fill gaps in the literature and lay the groundwork for
 a meaningful campaign that restores trust in vaccines, we
 drew on local narratives to design, refine and ultimately
 test a story-­ based intervention that connects vaccine-­
 hesitant caregivers (eg, parents, other family members,
 legal guardians), policymakers, healthcare workers
 (HCWs) and other community actors. We developed and
 tested our HCD-­driven intervention in a country that
 has experienced an unprecedented erosion of vaccine
 confidence in childhood vaccinations: The Philippines.
 Dramatic declines in vaccine confidence and uptake
 in the Philippines are linked to a dengue vaccination
 controversy in 2017, which sparked widespread distrust
 in childhood vaccinations and led to large-­scale measles
 outbreaks and the loss of a 20-­year polio-­free status in
 2019. 19 20 Against this contextual backdrop, we devel-
 oped an animated video intervention called ‘Salubong’,
 a Filipino term that refers to welcoming someone back
 into one’s life and which elicits ideas about friendship
 and family relationships. We extended this concept to
 vaccines to design an intervention that would encourage
 re-­welcoming vaccines into homes.
 In this article, we present the randomised controlled
 trial (RCT) results of testing the final story-­based vaccine
 confidence intervention. Our work provides evidence
 that can inform upcoming campaigns and regulations
 targeted at restoring public confidence in vaccines.
 
<section> METHODS
 
<section> Study design and setting
 We undertook an RCT targeting parents or caregivers of
 under-­five children in urban and rural communities of
 Calabarzon region, the Philippines. Calabarzon region
 (population ~16 million) is the most populous region
 in the Luzon group of Islands, where measles cases rose
 300% in 2019. 22–24 We purposively selected Dasmariñas
 City (urban arm) and Silang, Cavite (rural arm) to reflect
 both rural and urbanised conditions, and to capture
 different and varied sociodemographic factors and
 health facility-­related experiences on child health and
 vaccinations. A published protocol and methodological
 articles provide a detailed overview of the study design
 and data collection techniques. 21 25
 Table 1 shows the summary of the study phases, specific
 objectives and corresponding outputs, which track the
 four phases of HCD. Within any given phase, we allowed
 for iterations and repetitions as necessary. We had to
 forgo in-­ person data collection due to the COVID-­
 pandemic 25 and shifted all data collection activities to
 a remote RCT in line with the procedures outlined in
 the published protocol 21 and the recommendations of
 the European Medicines Agency and the Philippines
 Inter-­Agency Task Force amid COVID-­19 pandemic to
 ensure study participants’ and researchers’ protection.
 Data collector trainings included modules on computers, 
<insert> Figure 1 Think-­aloud exercises performed during the iteration 
<iend>

 
<insert> Human-­centred design
 Date component Aims and target groups
 August–
 September
 2020
 October–
 December
 2020
 Preparatory phase ► Understanding the challenges on childhood
 vaccinations, perceptions of vaccines and health
 system
 ► In-­depth interviews (IDIs) with policymakers (n=19)
 Phase 1: Shared ► Gathering information about how participants
 Appraising: ‘Empathise’ frame vaccine hesitancy as a problem, how they
 situate themselves (particularly considering their
 sociocultural context) and learning which factors
 would motivate them to address the problem
 ► IDIs with vaccine-­hesitant caregivers (n=44),
 vaccine-­accepting caregivers (n=11), healthcare
 workers (n=7) and community leaders (n=3)
 January–
 March 2021
 Phase 2: Life stories and ► End-­users suggest ideas to address the problem in
 Uncovering: ‘Define and collaboration with the research team
 Ideate’ ► Focus group discussions (FGDs) (n=5) and IDIs
 (n=6) with caregivers and FGDs with community
 health workers (n=4)
 April–July
 2021
 Phase 3: Bridging and
 Optimising: ‘Prototype’
 August 2021–
 August 2022
 ► Narratives and
 descriptions
 ► Storyboard development
 ► Refined storyboards
 ► Prototypes and products are then developed and ► Co-­produced prototype
 tested in real-­world settings with actual users via (5 min animated cartoon
 actual delivery systems video+online delivery
 ► IDIs with healthcare workers (n=14) approach)
 Phase 4: Navigating and ► A particularly promising product is introduced more ► Tested intervention
 Gaining: ‘Test’ broadly
 ► Randomised controlled trial with caregivers (n=719)
 Outputs
 Table 1 Details of the development of ‘SALUBONG’ intervention video 
<iend>

 apps, video conferencing platforms and online voice
 recorders, as well as data backup and security protocols.
 We used Zoom breakout rooms to train data collectors,
 which allowed them to practice survey approaches in
 different groups, with and without trainer supervision.
 For consenting, in lieu of meeting participants in-­person
 and establishing informed consent by signature or finger-
 print, participants signed consent forms remotely during
 a recorded video call and shared a ‘selfie’ with the signed
 form.
 The stories and experiences of participating vaccine-­
 hesitant caregivers served as the impetus for the Salubong
 video. 27 28 Qualitative data collected amid HCD phases
 outlined the role of sociocultural context in shaping
 vaccine hesitancy in the Philippines and the widespread
 consequences of the dengue vaccine scare across various
 population strata. These findings highlighted the poten-
 tial of real-­life narratives in developing and honing an
 intervention rooted in the local context. 27–29 Preliminary
 cartoon sketches and characters for the storyboards were
 presented and iterated along the way. We performed
 think-­aloud exercises with caregivers, HCWs and commu-
 nity leaders using analogue flipboards and/or screen
 share digital photos of the paper-­based storyboards to
 
<section> and prototyping phase. 
<section> critique and refine the storyboards (see figure 1). Local
 Filipino cartoonists were involved throughout the design
 process, including via: (a) sharing of video snippets of
 qualitative interviews including design feedback; (b)
 collaboration in debriefings and/or provision of the
 debriefing notes; (c) consultative Zoom meetings on the
 development and refinement of the video storyboards
 and (d) continuous refinement of the sketches based on
 emerging design insights. We had originally planned to
 have local cartoonists join in on the online interviews as
 observers, but we ultimately decided against it because of
 the sensitivity of the vaccination topic in the local context
 and ethical considerations.
 The HCD-­driven intervention was iteratively improved
 based on participants’ feedback and insights from poli-
 cymakers and various actors working directly with the
 public health system to counteract falling immunisation
 rates. 29 Figure 2 shows the preliminary results of these
 iterative and prototyping processes. The full complexi-
 ties of the design process, which lasted 12–15 months,
 entailed extensive discussions among various actors
 (scientists, policymakers, healthcare providers, commu-
 nity and local stakeholders, animators and cartoonists,
 health promotion experts, communication and social
 media officers, etc) and further details of the processes
 in terms of how we chose the medium and the message
 will be presented elsewhere.
 The intervention video included a 5-­minute animated
 cartoon, entitled: ‘Salubong: Building Vaccine Confi-
 dence’, that narratively featured stories of Filipino fami-
 lies about vaccines (the front cover of the video is shown
 in figure 3). The cartoon used a narrative and empathic
 format tailored to the Filipino cultural setting, featuring
 diverse characters of different ages, household compo-
 sitions and income, and ethnic backgrounds, as well as
 appealing colours for optimal contrast. The Salubong
 video was co-­created in collaboration with study partici-
 pants, and Filipino local cartoonists and dubbed by voice
 actors from The Coffee Creatives, an animator’s studio
 in the Philippines. The original video is in Filipino, and
 there are two other versions with Filipino and English
 subtitles. The Salubong intervention video is avail-
 able for viewing (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=​
 M8nEj5G9Iuc).
 
<section> Study oversight
 Prior to commencement, permission to undertake this
 study was obtained from Department of Health offi-
 cials (national, regional and provincial offices). Further,
 through official letters and Zoom courtesy calls, we also
 acquired permission from local authorities and leaders
 in the Calabarzon region to carry out the study in their
 respective communities. Informed consent was obtained
 from all participants prior to their enrolment.
 
<section> Experimental design and set-up
 We randomly selected barangays (‘small communities’)
 from Dasmariñas City (urban arm) and Silang, Cavite
 (rural arm) that had not previously participated in a
 qualitative component of the study (results of which are
 described elsewhere 27 ). We estimated sample sizes of
 200 participants per group (intervention and control
 arms in rural and urban areas), yielding a total of
 individuals. With an 85% response rate, a 5% type I error
 rate, and a 20% type II error rate, the calculated sample
 size allowed us to detect a difference of 15% in the binary
 outcome between the intervention and control groups in
 each area.
 We performed a multistage stratified sampling frame
 to select barangays. From each of the two study sites,
 two barangays with the highest population, based on the
 most recent population report available, were selected to
 ensure enough potential participants. The two selected
 barangays (per urban and rural arms) were randomly
 allocated as an intervention and as a control site. A listing
 of households with under-­ five children was obtained
 from the local health officials. The household listing
 served as a sampling frame from which 200 households
 were randomly selected and invited to participate in the
 study. In four originally sampled barangays (two each
 for control and intervention groups), the number of
 interviewed caregivers was less than 200. In line with the
 processes defined in the research protocol, we therefore
 sampled additional barangays as per the criteria above.
 We collaborated with community health workers who
 conducted house visits, obtained caregivers’ mobile
 phone numbers and obtained consent to be contacted
 by the research team, following the selection and allo-
 cation of the potential participants to intervention or
 control groups. Community health workers also distrib-
 uted consent forms and informed potential participants
 that a member of the research team would contact them.
 Afterwards, the potential participants were invited to
 participate during a phone call where the study aims
 were briefly introduced. If individuals expressed interest
 in the initial phone contact, we either directly continued
 with a detailed study discussion and obtained online
 informed consent (via Facebook Messenger video call)
 or scheduled a separate appointment. To ensure partic-
 ipants’ internet connectivity throughout the consent
 process and trial procedures, we purchased and trans-
 mitted mobile data packages to participants.
 Once consent was obtained, the videos (intervention
 and control) and surveys (pre and post) were delivered
 online. We developed and used an online version of the
 survey forms, which we pilot-­tested among 30 caregivers
 to ensure feasibility (either self-­ administered or data
 collector-­assisted) and alleviate operational challenges.
 Following the pilot testing of the survey forms, we there-
 fore decided to conduct data collector-­assisted surveys (ie,
 data collectors read the questions to the participants and
 are responsible for encoding the answers in the online
 form). After completion of the baseline survey, the Salu-
 bong video was then screened for members belonging
 to the intervention group, while the ‘Paano labanan ang
 
<section> COVID-­19 (How to fight COVID-­ 19)’ animated video, 
<section> Figure 2 Iterations—before and after adaptation—of the SALUBONG
 which was created by the Philippines Department of
 Health’s Health Promotion Bureau (ie, focused on the
 value of staying at home, transmission, and signs and
 symptoms), was screened for control group participants.
 
<section> intervention.
 
<section> We used ‘online screen-­ sharing’ functions to screen
 videos for participants. To avoid biases or contamina-
 tion of the data, no interactions were attempted during
 the presentation of the videos. Following the video, we 
<section> Figure 3 
<section> Cover of the cartoon ‘SALUBONG: Building vaccine confidence’.
 
<section> conducted a follow-­up using the same survey as the base-
 line assessment (without re-­ capturing the sociodemo-
 graphic information gathered in the baseline survey).
 Before and after watching the intervention or control
 video, participants in both groups were asked to
 provide information about their attitudes toward vacci-
 nations, with statements such as, ‘Children get more
 shots than are good for them’, ‘I believe that many
 of the illnesses that vaccinations prevent are severe’
 and ‘It is better for my child to develop immunity by
 getting sick than to get a shot’, among others. We used
 the parents’ attitudes about childhood vaccination
 (PACV-­15) adapted from Opel and colleagues. 30–34 The
 PACV-­15 exhibits robust psychometric properties 30–34
 and has proven to be a valuable instrument extensively
 employed in prior research assessing parental vaccine
 attitudes. 35 36 While we left the fundamental structure
 of the tool unchanged, we made modifications to the
 questionnaire wording to align with the study context
 and retained more of the granularity of 5-­point and
 10-­ point Likert items when scoring compared with
 the collapsed category scoring of the original PACV-­15
 calculation method. This allowed us to focus primarily
 on how the intervention affected response patterns and
 to assess whether the intervention caused, for example,
 polarisation of attitudes while enabling us to make
 the cultural comparisons and gain the insights into
 parental attitudes towards vaccines that the PACV-­15
 allows. The full questionnaire is included as online
 supplemental file 1. Responses ranged from ‘strongly
 disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’ on a 5-­ point scale. To
 lessen the subjective uncertainty associated with Likert
 Scales, we presented the responses as visual analogues
 (ie, a combination of facial emojis, colour gradations,
 numbers and integration of Filipino words).
 
<section> Data treatment and analysis
 Achieving the originally envisioned sample size proved
 challenging. As outlined above, we sampled participants
 from more barangays than initially envisioned, (a total of
 8 in control and 4 intervention barangays across urban
 and rural study sites), following the pre-­defined proce-
 dures, due to difficulties reaching participants fulfilling
 the inclusion criteria under pandemic conditions, and as
 many potential participants refused to participate online.
 We considered shifting to in-­ person data collection
 but ultimately decided against it due to the COVID-­19
 concerns raised by the selected barangays and budgetary
 constraints. Instead, we analysed the data sets available
 after more than 1 year of data collection (n=719) to see
 if adding more information could impact the primary
 outcomes. We calculated whether knowledge had
 increased in total (ie, the total points in the suggested
 approach are higher in pre-­ intervention and post-­
 intervention) and in which particular domain knowledge
 had increased. Furthermore, we did linear regression
 analysis with ‘change in scores’ as the result, ‘interven-
 tion’ as the major factor and ‘demographics’ as the other
 components. As there was little room for improvement
 via the intervention because of the high percentage of
 participants in the intervention and control groups
 expressing the desired response to D1 (‘delays in taking
 vaccines’), we concluded that additional sampling to
 include the originally envisioned n=800 participants
 could not change the study’s conclusions with regard to
 this outcome. Secondary outcomes would similarly be
 unaffected by additional data collection. We therefore
 stopped collecting data and analysed the available data
 sets.
 Overall, we assessed the binary improvement
 (improvement vs no improvement) and the amount of 
<insert> Table 2 Sociodemographic characteristics
 Characteristics
 Total
 (n=719)
 Intervention Control
 (n=396) (n=323)
 Sex, n (%)
  Female 693 (96.4) 379 (95.7) 314 (97.2)
  Male 26 (3.6) 17 (4.3) 9 (2.8)
 Age, mean (SD) 32.7 (8.7) 33.0 (8.9) 32.2 (8.5)
  Rural 396 (55.1) 196 (49.5) 200 (61.9)
  Urban 323 (44.9) 200 (50.5) 123 (38.1)
 Place of residence, n (%)
 Participant’s occupation, n (%)
  Housewife 364 (50.6) 207 (52.3) 157 (48.6)
  None 113 (15.7) 59 (14.9) 54 (16.7)
  Business 82 (11.4) 46 (11.6) 36 (11.1)
  Manual labourer 50 (7.0) 22 (5.6) 28 (8.7)
  Self-­employed 49 (6.8) 30 (7.6) 19 (5.9)
  Professional 46 (6.4) 26 (6.6) 20 (6.2)
  Community health
 worker
 8 (1.1) 3 (0.8) 5 (1.5)
  Student 4 (0.6) 2 (0.5) 2 (0.6)
  Clerical support 1 (0.1) 0 (0.0) 1 (0.3)
  Retired 2 (0.2) 1 (0.3) 1 (0.3)
 Educational attainment, n (%)
  None 2 (0.3) 2 (0.5) 0 (0.0)
  Elementary 51 (7.1) 33 (8.3) 18 (5.6)
  High school
 undergraduate
 97 (13.5) 47 (11.9) 50 (15.5)
  High school
 graduate
 304 (42.3) 176 (44.4) 128 (39.6)
  Vocational
 education
 51 (7.1) 27 (6.8) 24 (7.4)
  College
 undergraduate
 120 (16.7) 63 (15.9) 57 (17.7)
  College graduate 90 (12.5) 47 (11.9) 43 (13.3)
  Graduate studies 4 (0.6) 1 (0.3) 3 (0.9)
 Primary healthcare decision-­maker in the family, n (%)
  Mother 540 (75.1) 296 (74.7) 244 (75.5)
  Father 111 (15.4) 61 (15.4) 50 (15.5)
  Grandmother 55 (7.6) 33 (8.3) 22 (6.8)
  Grandfather 5 (0.7) 2 (0.5) 3 (0.9)
  Other sibling 3 (0.4) 0 (0.0) 3 (0.9)
  Both parents 2 (0.3) 1 (0.3) 1 (0.3)
  Both grandparents 2 (0.3) 2 (0.5) 0 (0.0)
  Live-­in partner 1 (0.1) 1 (0.3) 0 (0.0)
 1.3 (0.5) 1.3 (0.5)
 2.4 (1.3) 2.3 (1.3)
 Number of under-­5 1.3 (0.5)
 years old children per
 household, mean (SD)
 Number of all children 2.4 (1.3)
 per household, mean
 (SD) 
<iend>

 improvement in vaccine attitudes and intentions after
 intervention exposure. The PACV-­15 Likert Scales were
 labelled D4–D13 (10 items), and the responses were
 transformed from a 1 to 5 scale to a −2 to 2 scale, with
 −2 representing the least desired option (regardless of
 whether that was 1 or 5 in the original scale). The more
 items we included, the more granular the differences we
 could discern both person-­to-­person and within a person
 over time. Additionally, the Likert scale responses were
 analysed inferentially by coding answers from 1 (strongly
 disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) and drawing on para-
 metrical (paired t-­test) or non-­parametrical (Wilcoxon
 signed rank test) approaches, depending on sample
 characteristics. Electronic copies of all data were saved
 offline and external hard drives were stored in a locked
 cabinet at the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine in
 the Philippines. All data management and analyses were
 performed using STATA (Stata Corp, College Station,
 Texas, USA) and R (R Development Core Team, Vienna,
 Austria) statistical software. An author reflexivity state-
 ment on our partnership is included as online supple-
 
<section> mental file
 
<section> Patient and public involvement
 Patients and the public were not directly involved in the
 design, conduct, reporting, or dissemination plans for
 this study. However, the research team consistently gath-
 ered participant narratives and feedbacks in accordance
 with the principles of HCD (for the overall study) and
 qualitative research, and the findings provided here give
 voice to these participant experiences.
 
<section> RESULTS
 Demographic characteristics and participant flow
 Between 11 August 2021 and 15 August 2022, 719 partic-
 ipants were surveyed; 396 participants were from urban
 areas, while 323 were from rural areas (table 2). A
 majority of participants were women (96%), were most
 frequently housewives (51%) and had completed at least
 their high school education (79%). Among the sociode-
 mographic characteristics, only the place of residence
 differed significantly between intervention and control
 groups (Pearson χ=11.10, p=0.001). After receiving a
 randomly assigned treatment, 396 participants watched
 the Salubong video while 323 participants saw a standard
 COVID-­ 19 health education video. Figure 4 shows a
 diagram of the participant flow.
 
<section> HCD video increases vaccine confidence
 Figure 5A depicts a positive upward trend in the mean
 improvement on D4–D13 after exposure to the interven-
 tion video versus the control video. Although the inter-
 vention group began with marginally higher baseline
 vaccine attitude scores, our findings showed that 62% of
 the intervention group improved their vaccine attitude
 scores versus 37% of the control group (Fisher’s exact,
 p<0.001), and the mean attitude score improvements on
 the 5-­point scale were higher when limiting assessment to 
<section> Figure 4 Trial recruitment and retention of participants.
 
<section> those whose scores improved after watching the assigned
 video (Cohen’s d=0.32 with 95% CI 0.10 to 0.54, two-­
 sided t-­test, p<0.01). Comparing the intervention group
 to the control group, participants in the intervention
 group were substantially less likely to experience post-­test
 mean score reductions, but among those who did, there
 was no statistically significant difference in score change
 (−0.31 vs −0.29, two-­sided t-­test, p=0.34).
 When limiting the analysis to participants who had
 previously delayed or refused vaccination in the past, 
<section> Figure 5 Caregiver’s attitudes toward childhood vaccines pre-­intervention
 we were left with 240 participants, some in interven-
 tion and some in the control groups. Participants who
 stated they had previously delayed or rejected vaccinating
 their children exhibit similar patterns: 67% of 110 in
 the intervention group improved their vaccine attitude
 scores compared with 42% of 130 in the control group
 (Fisher’s exact, p<0.001) (figure 5B). Among individuals
 whose scores improved after watching the assigned video,
 the intervention group saw higher mean attitude score
 improvements on the 5-­point scale that were marginally
 significant (Cohen’s d=0.35 with 95% CI −0.01 to 0.70,
 two-­sided t-­test, p=0.06). Intervention participants (who
 had previously delayed or refused vaccination) were
 much less likely to see declines in their mean scores post-­
 test compared with control, but among those who did
 decline, there was no statistically significant score change
 when comparing intervention versus control (−0.33 vs
 −0.31, two-­sided t-­test, p=0.73). Further, the participants
 (who had previously delayed or refused vaccination) were
 substantially more likely to increase their score at all, and
 
<section> Figure 6 Caregiver’s attitudes regarding HCWs pre-­intervention
 
<section> and post-­intervention.
 
<section> those in the intervention group who did so marginally
 more than those in the control group.
 
<section> Intervention showed vaccine confidence score improvements
 among those who did not trust HCWs
 Participants who listed HCWs as among their most
 trusted sources of vaccine information had baseline
 average scores that were higher than those who did not
 (0.15 vs 0.03; t-­test, p=0.02) (figure 6). When analysing
 intervention versus control score changes from pre-­test
 to post-­ test in each group determined by HCW trust
 status, intervention had greater score improvement than
 control insofar as more intervention group participants
 saw improvements in their post-­test versus pre-­test scores
 (66% vs 28% among those who did not trust HCWs; 61%
 vs 39% among those who did trust HCWs), but among
 those whose scores improved, the amount of improve-
 ment was similar comparing intervention to control (0.35
 vs 0.29 among those who did not trust HCWs; 0.38 vs 0.30
 among those who did trust HCWs).
 
<section> and post-­intervention. HCWs, healthcare workers. 
<insert> Figure 8 Perception to the intervention and control videos. 
<iend>

 
<section> Figure 7 Caregiver’s who do not list HCWs as their most trusted
 We narrowed our analysis to people whose most trusted
 source of information was someone other than HCWs, as
 they are an important group to reach with vaccine confi-
 dence messaging and they had a significantly different
 baseline score than others (figure 7). Our results showed
 that the intervention group still reflected statistically
 significant improvements in post-­test scores compared
 with the control group in terms of more intervention
 group participants’ scores improving (66% vs 28%, Fish-
 er’s exact p<0.001), with the improvers among the two
 groups improving a comparable amount (0.35 interven-
 tion vs 0.29 among controls, two-­sided t-­test, p=0.35).
 
<section> source of information. HCWs, healthcare workers.
 
<section> Human-centred video boosts positive feelings about vaccines
 We assessed participants’ affective responses to the videos
 both before and after they watched the intervention or
 control videos (figure 8). We included declarations like
 ‘I feel that the people in the healthcare system respect my
 situation’, ‘I feel that I am warmly welcomed by health-
 care workers in the health facilities’, and ‘I feel that
 agreeing to vaccines is a way to show my love for my chil-
 dren’. The baseline values were extremely high, with an
 average of 1.47 (with a possible range of −2 to 2); these
 items therefore had very little space for improvement in a 
<section> pre-­test to post-­test comparison. The intervention group,
 however, still included more people who improved their
 scores (34% vs 24%) and fewer individuals whose scores
 declined at post-­ test (20% vs 37%) than the control
 group.
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 
<section> To the best of our knowledge, this is the first RCT that
 examined the efficacy of a video-­ based, HCD-­ driven
 intervention improving parental confidence in child-
 hood vaccinations in the Philippines. We found that
 our HCD-­ driven intervention, the Salubong animated
 video, positively impacted caregiver attitudes and confi-
 dence toward childhood vaccinations. Our intervention
 also improved vaccine confidence among participants
 who previously delayed or refused a vaccine for their
 children. Our findings reaffirm the value of HCD as a
 meaning-­making approach that influences attitudes and
 behavioural intent in general 1 2 37 38 including in relation
 to vaccination.
 Our results support the use of HCD to boost vaccine
 confidence along the vaccine hesitancy continuum. A
 number of research studies have used HCD when devel-
 oping vaccine confidence interventions with promising
 results, for example, to design mobile Apps to inform
 parents about the vaccination status of their children
 in Germany 13 and to increase HPV vaccination uptake
 among adolescent girls in the USA. 40 Also, UNICEF’s
 Human Centred Design 4 Health initiative includes
 several case studies of countries that have implemented
 HCD-­driven interventions including the ‘rock in a jar’
 in Mali (which involves giving grandmothers a jar full of
 stones to ease their burden of remembering vaccination
 schedules) and a ‘playmat board game’ in Nigeria (which
 portrays a journey map of critical milestones and health-­
 seeking behaviours to bring health education closer to
 households). 41 Our findings add to the growing collec-
 tion of HCD-­driven initiatives for public health promo-
 tion to bolster vaccine confidence.
 Some studies also provide evidence of the effective-
 ness of different types of vaccine confidence interven-
 tions and highlight the importance of addressing vaccine
 confidence as a barrier to vaccine uptake. Prior successful
 interventions include text message reminders for influ-
 enza vaccine uptake in Australia, 42 an internet-­ based
 social media intervention to address parents’ vaccine
 concerns in the USA 43 and an individually tailored educa-
 tional application for pregnant women and mothers in
 the USA. 44 Our findings contribute to the literature by
 showing that vaccine-­ hesitant individuals can improve
 their vaccine intentions and the potential of HCD-­driven
 interventions in promoting vaccine confidence.
 Our findings also provide concrete evidence of the
 opportunities of empathic-­driven interventions, partic-
 ularly for low-­resource settings combating vaccine losses
 brought on by controversies. 41 The notion that vaccine
 hesitancy has time, vulnerability and volatility (ie, roller
 coaster sentiments) dimensions underscores the impor-
 tance of incorporating context and ongoing public senti-
 ments in any interventions aimed at boosting vaccine
 confidence. 18 Ofri described this phenomenon as
 ‘emotional epidemiology’, arguing for it to be as critical
 as clinical epidemiology and calling for addressing the
 existential concerns of the public over vaccines. 45 Simi-
 larly, in light of the volatility of vaccine hesitancy, Larson
 urges researchers to reconfigure the definition and
 measurements as ‘vaccine hesitancy is not a behaviour’,
 but rather ‘a psychological state of indecisiveness’.
 Contextual awareness then is essential in evaluating how
 much traction a particular vaccination effort can receive
 and how substantial a reaction it can generate. 18 46 There-
 fore, HCD offers a promising mechanism to contend with
 the volatility inherent to vaccine hesitancy by putting the
 needs, wants and experiences of people at the centre of
 the design process. In terms of measuring vaccine hesi-
 tancy in our study, we acknowledge PACV-­15 as a valuable
 tool for measuring changes in vaccine confidence. 30
 Additionally, we drew on affective questions to empha-
 sise vaccine-­related emotional responses to account for
 vaccine hesitancy’s volatility, which allowed us to better
 understand the affective responses our participants
 expressed towards vaccines adding to the ongoing discus-
 sion about suitable metrics and additional indicators for
 capturing the complexities of vaccine hesitancy.
 While our findings are generally encouraging, we note
 limitations. First, confidence and intent to vaccinate do
 not always translate into actual vaccination uptake. We
 invite future researchers to implement similar interven-
 tions that include actual vaccine uptake as an outcome
 measure. Second, certain concerns might be associ-
 ated with this study being conducted online, especially
 regarding internet connectivity concerns and informed
 consent processes. However, we developed online data
 collection and standard operating procedures to allay
 these operational worries. 25 Third, we also recognise that
 survey questions might lead to response biases, especially
 when they are delivered online; to keep participants
 focused, we avoided using one single question design
 throughout the survey. Instead, we used a combination
 of binary questions, Likert Scales, and response contin-
 uums to provide a range of response options and main-
 tain engagement. Additionally, we translated the options
 into the local language and modified our Likert Scales
 to incorporate facial emojis, colour continuums, and
 number continuums. Therefore, by employing these
 strategies, which urge participants to think about their
 responses, we hope to have alleviated response biases. By
 delivering the survey online, we might expect to see less
 social desirability bias and greater item non-­response;
 while we could not assess for social desirability bias using
 the data we collected, item non-­response rates were zero
 on both intervention and control. Finally, we draw atten-
 tion to the fact that a majority of our participants are
 women. While women are regarded as key caregivers in
 Filipino households, the lack of other perspectives might 
<section> have led us to overlook nuances in vaccine decision-­
 making. Therefore, we encourage future research to
 specifically target diverse household members.
 
<section> CONCLUSION
 
<section> Our study confirms that HCD is a promising approach to
 improving vaccine attitudes and intentions. Our findings
 may help shape future initiatives and legislation aimed
 at regaining the public’s trust in vaccinations. More
 extensive studies are needed, especially in light of the
 prevalent misinformation about vaccines and the need
 to study actual vaccination uptake results in addition to
 
<section> intentions.
 
<section> Author affiliations
 Heidelberg Institute of Global Health, Ruprecht-­Karls-­Universität Heidelberg,
 
<section> Heidelberg, Germany
 Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Research Institute for Tropical
 Medicine - Department of Health, Muntinlupa City, Philippines
 School of Public Health, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg-­
 
<section> Braamfontein, South Africa
 Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa
 College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
 International Health Department, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of
 Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
 
<section> Twitter Shannon A McMahon @shannonamcmahon
 
<section> Acknowledgements We acknowledge the other member of the Project
 SALUBONG Team from the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine, Philippines:
 Nicanor de Claro III and Victoria Graziell Zaragoza. We also acknowledge Karla Mae
 Ujano and her team at The Coffee Creatives for their assistance with the animation
 video. Additionally, we extend our gratitude to the barangay health workers and
 local officials of Cavite Province and Dasmariñas City for their collaboration and
 support during data collection.
 
<section> Contributors MDCR wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. MDCR, JW, KB and
 SM conceived and designed the experiments. JL-­G and MFA performed project
 administration. MDCR, JRG, JL-­G, VE, JL, MFA, TAB, CM, MPD and CS conducted
 data collection and data management. VE supported graphic design. MDCR and
 RPC performed data analysis and visualisation. JW, KB and TB contributed to the
 report writing and critically reviewed the manuscript. RPC and SM supervised all
 the writing and editing of the manuscript. MDCR serves as a guarantor for this
 study. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.
 
<section> Funding This work was supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
 [OPP1217275]. Under the grant conditions of the Foundation, a Creative Commons
 Attribution 4.0 Generic License has already been assigned to the Author Accepted
 Manuscript version that might arise from this submission. MDCR further received
 support in the form of a PhD scholarship grant from Katholischer Akademischer
 Ausländer-­Dienst (KAAD). The funders did not play a role in the preparation of this
 research article.
 
<section> Competing interests None declared.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were not involved in
 the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.
 
<section> Patient consent for publication Consent obtained from parent(s)/guardian(s).
 
<section> Ethics approval This study involves human participants and was approved.
 Ethical approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Board of the Research
 Institute for Tropical Medicine (approval no. 2019-­44) and the Ethical Commission of
 Heidelberg University, Faculty of Medicine (approval No. S-­833/2019). Participants
 gave informed consent to participate in the study before taking part.
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
 
<section> Data availability statement Data are available upon reasonable request. Data
 are not publicly available due to the sensitive and personal nature of data and
 the collected information. Data may be available on request to authors, with
 restrictions following ethical approval. Please contact the corresponding author.
 
<section> Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has
 not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been
 peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those
 of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and
 responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content
 includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability
 of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines,
 terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error
 and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
 Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
 others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any
 purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given,
 and indication of whether changes were made. See: https://creativecommons.org/​
 licenses/by/4.0/.
 
<section> ORCID iDs
 
<section> Mark Donald C Reñosa http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7414-7174
 Jonas Wachinger http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5480-3138
 Vivienne Endoma http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0225-3939
 Jeniffer Landicho http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4261-9296
 Kate Bärnighausen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4466-8921
 Till Bärnighausen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4182-4212
 Rachel P Chase http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1503-4954
 Shannon A McMahon http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8634-9283
 
<section> REFERENCES
 1 Bazzano AN, Martin J, Hicks E, et al. Human-­centred design in
 global health: A Scoping review of applications and contexts. PLoS
 One 2017;12:e0186744.
 2 Melles M, Albayrak A, Goossens R. Innovating health care: key
 characteristics of human-­centered design. Int J Qual Health Care
 2021;33:37–44.
 3 Holeman I, Kane D. Human-­centered design for global health equity.
 
<section> Inf Technol Dev 2019;26:477–505.
 4 Adam M, McMahon SA, Prober C, et al. Human-­centered design
 of Video-­based health education: an Iterative, collaborative,
 community-­based approach. J Med Internet Res 2019;21:e12128.
 5 Adam M, Tomlinson M, Le Roux I, et al. The Philani MOVIE study: a
 cluster-­randomized controlled trial of a mobile Video entertainment-­
 education intervention to promote exclusive Breastfeeding in South
 Africa. BMC Health Serv Res 2019;19:211.
 6 Isler J, Sawadogo NH, Harling G, et al. If he sees it with his own
 eyes, he will understand': how gender informed the content and
 delivery of a maternal nutrition intervention in Burkina Faso. Health
 Policy Plan 2020;35:536–45.
 7 Isler J, Sawadogo NH, Harling G, et al. Iterative adaptation of a
 mobile nutrition Video-­based intervention across countries using
 human-­centered design: qualitative study. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth
 2019;7:e13604.
 8 Adam M, Johnston J, Job N, et al. Evaluation of a community-­based
 mobile Video Breastfeeding intervention in Khayelitsha, South Africa:
 the Philani MOVIE cluster-­randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med
 2021;18:e1003744.
 9 Chamberlain S, Dutt P, Mitra R, et al. Lessons learnt from applying
 a human-­centred design process to develop one of the largest
 mobile health communication programmes in the world. BMJ Innov
 2022;8:240–6.
 10 Muinga N, Paton C, Gicheha E, et al. Using a human-­centred design
 approach to develop a comprehensive newborn monitoring chart for
 inpatient care in Kenya. BMC Health Serv Res 2021;21:1010.
 11 de Figueiredo A, Simas C, Karafillakis E, et al. Mapping global
 trends in vaccine confidence and investigating barriers to vaccine
 uptake: a large-­scale retrospective temporal Modelling study. Lancet
 2020;396:898–908.
 12 Chamberlain AT, Limaye RJ, O’Leary ST, et al. Development and
 acceptability of a Video-­based vaccine promotion Tutorial for
 obstetric care providers. Vaccine 2019;37:2532–6.
 13 Seeber L, Conrad T, Hoppe C, et al. Educating parents about
 the vaccination status of their children: A user-­centered mobile
 application. Prev Med Rep 2017;5:241–50.
 14 Minoletti S, Rapisarda R, Giraldo L, et al. User-­centered design of
 a pediatric vaccination Module for patients. Stud Health Technol
 Inform 2019;264:1096–100. 
<section> 15 Henninger ML, Mcmullen CK, Firemark AJ, et al. User-­centered
 design for developing interventions to improve clinician
 recommendation of human Papillomavirus vaccination. Perm J
 2017;21:16-­191.
 16 Seeber L, Michl B, Rundblad G, et al. A design thinking approach
 to effective vaccine safety communication. Curr Drug Saf
 2015;10:31–40.
 17 Simas C, Larson HJ. Overcoming vaccine hesitancy in low-­income
 and middle-­income regions. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2021;7:41.
 18 Larson HJ. The vaccine-­hesitant moment. reply. N Engl J Med
 2022;387:1050–1.
 19 Larson HJ, Hartigan-­Go K, de Figueiredo A. Vaccine confidence
 plummets in the Philippines following Dengue vaccine scare: why
 it matters to pandemic preparedness. Hum Vaccin Immunother
 2019;15:625–7.
 20 International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
 
<section> Operations Update Philippines: Re-­emergence of vaccine
 preventable diseases – Measles outbreak. 2020.
 21 Reñosa MDC, Wachinger J, Bärnighausen K, et al. How can
 human-­centered design build a story-­based Video intervention that
 addresses vaccine hesitancy and bolsters vaccine confidence in the
 Philippines? A Mixedmethod protocol for project SALUBONG. BMJ
 Open 2021;11:e046814.
 
<section> 22 UNICEF-­WHO Philippines. Situation Report 3: Measles Outbreak.
 
<section> Philippines: World Health Organization Philippines, 2019.
 23 OCHA Services. Philippines: measles outbreak - Feb 2019. 2019.
 
<section> 24 Outbreak News. Measles: Calabarzon reports 3,835 percent increase
 in 2019. Outbreak News Today, 2019.
 25 Reñosa MDC, Mwamba C, Meghani A, et al. Selfie consents, remote
 rapport, and zoom Debriefings: collecting qualitative data amid a
 pandemic in four resource-­constrained settings. BMJ Glob Health
 2021;6:e004193.
 26 Aligato MF, Endoma V, Wachinger J, et al. “'unfocused groups':
 lessons learnt amid remote focus groups in the Philippines”. Fam
 Med Community Health 2021;9:e001098.
 27 Landicho-­Guevarra J, Reñosa MDC, Wachinger J, et al. Scared,
 powerless, insulted and embarrassed: hesitancy towards vaccines
 among Caregivers in Cavite province, the Philippines. BMJ Glob
 Health 2021;6:e006529.
 28 Wachinger J, Reñosa MDC, Endoma V, et al. Bargaining and
 gendered authority: a framework to understand household decision-­
 making about childhood vaccines in the Philippines. BMJ Glob
 Health 2022;7:e009781.
 29 Reñosa MDC, Wachinger J, Bärnighausen K, et al. “Misinformation,
 infighting, backlash, and an 'endless' recovery; policymakers
 recount challenges and mitigating measures after a vaccine scare in
 the Philippines”. Glob Health Action 2022;15:2077536.
 30 Group WSW. Report of the SAGE working group on vaccine
 hesitancy. 2014.
 
<section> 31 Larson HJ, Jarrett C, Schulz WS, et al. Measuring vaccine
 hesitancy: the development of a survey tool. Vaccine
 2015;33:4165–75.
 32 Opel DJ, Taylor JA, Mangione-­Smith R, et al. Validity and
 reliability of a survey to identify vaccine-­hesitant parents. Vaccine
 2011;29:6598–605.
 33 Opel DJ, Mangione-­Smith R, Taylor JA, et al. Development of a
 survey to identify vaccine-­hesitant parents: the parent attitudes
 about childhood vaccines survey. Hum Vaccin 2011;7:419–25.
 34 Opel DJ, Taylor JA, Zhou C, et al. The relationship between
 parent attitudes about childhood vaccines survey scores and
 future child immunization status: a validation study. JAMA Pediatr
 2013;167:1065–71.
 35 Olarewaju VO, Jafflin K, Deml MJ, et al. Application of the parent
 attitudes about childhood vaccines (PACV) survey in three national
 languages in Switzerland: exploratory factor analysis and Mokken
 scale analysis. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2021;17:2652–60.
 36 Dyda A, King C, Dey A, et al. A systematic review of studies
 that measure parental vaccine attitudes and beliefs in childhood
 vaccination. BMC Public Health 2020;20:1253.
 37 Beres LK, Simbeza S, Holmes CB, et al. Human-­centered design
 lessons for implementation science: improving the implementation
 of a patient-­centered care intervention. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
 2019;82 Suppl 3:S230–43.
 38 Liu C, Lee JH, Gupta AJ, et al. Cost-­effectiveness analysis of
 human-­centred design for global health interventions: a quantitative
 framework. BMJ Glob Health 2022;7:e007912.
 
<section> 39 UNICEF Wa. Human-­centred design for tailoring immunization
 programmes. Geneva, Switzerland, 2022.
 40 Teitelman AM, Gregory EF, Jayasinghe J, et al. A mobile App to
 promote human Papillomavirus vaccine uptake among adolescents
 aged 11 to 14 years: development and usability study. JMIR Nurs
 2020;3:e19503.
 41 UNICEF. n.d. Stories: case studies from countries who have applied
 human-­centred design.
 42 Regan AK, Bloomfield L, Peters I, et al. Randomized controlled trial
 of text message reminders for increasing influenza vaccination. Ann
 Fam Med 2017;15:507–14.
 43 Daley MF, Narwaney KJ, Shoup JA, et al. Addressing parents'
 vaccine concerns: A randomized trial of a social media intervention.
 
<section> Am J Prev Med 2018;55:44–54.
 44 Dudley MZ, Omer SB, O’Leary ST, et al. Momstalkshots, tailored
 educational App, improves vaccine attitudes: a randomized
 controlled trial. BMC Public Health 2022;22:2134.
 45 Ofri D. The emotional epidemiology of H1N1 influenza vaccination. N
 Engl J Med 2009;361:2594–5.
 46 Larson HJ. Defining and measuring vaccine hesitancy. Nat Hum
 Behav 2022;6:1609–10.