
<section> A youth-­centred approach
 
<section> engagement in HIV services:
 
<section> centred design methods
 
<section> research trial in Kisumu
 
<section> Eliud Omondi Akama , 1,2 Laura K Beres,
 Harriet Adhiambo, 1,5 Sarah Bushuru, 1 Edwin
 Isaya Opondo, 1 Norton Sang, 1 Bertha Oketch
 Cirilus Ogollah Osongo, 1,6 Evelyn Nyandieka,
 Felix Ochieng, 1 Clinton Owino, 1 Thomas Odeny,
 Ingrid Eshun-­Wilson, 7 Maya Petersen, 8 Elizabeth
 Lisa L Abuogi
 
<section> Introduction Innovative interventions are needed to improve
 HIV outcomes among adolescents and young adults (AYAs)
 living with HIV. Engaging AYAs in intervention development
 could increase effectiveness and youth acceptance, yet
 
<section> To cite: Akama EO, Beres LK, research is limited. We applied human-­centred design (HCD) to
 Kulzer JL, et al. A youth-­ refine adherence-­support interventions pretrial and assessed
 centred approach to improving HCD workshop acceptability.
 engagement in HIV services: Methods We applied an iterative, four-­phased HCD process in
 human-­centred design 
<section> Kenya that included: (1) systematic review of extant knowledge,
 methods and outcomes in (2) prioritisation of design challenges, (3) a co-­creation
 a research trial in Kisumu workshop and (4) translation tables to pair insights with trial
 County, Kenya. BMJ Glob Health intervention adaptations. The co-­creation workshop was co-­led
 
<section> 2023;8:e012606. doi:10.1136/
 by youth facilitators employing participatory activities to inform
 
<section> bmjgh-2023-012606
 intervention adaptations. Iterative data analysis included rapid
 thematic analysis of visualised workshop outputs and notes
 
<section> Handling editor Valery Ridde
 using affinity mapping and dialogue to identify key themes. We
 
<section> ► Additional supplemental conducted a survey to assess workshop acceptability among
 material is published online only. participants.
 To view, please visit the journal Results Twenty-­two participants engaged in the 4-­day
 
<section> online (http://​dx. d 
<section> oi.​org/​10.​
 workshop. Co-­creation activities yielded recommendations
 1136/ b mjgh-​2023- 12606).
 for improving planned interventions (eg, message frequency
 and content; strategies to engage hard-­to-­reach participants),
 EOA and LKB contributed critical principles to employ across interventions (eg,
 equally. personalisation, AYA empowerment) and identification of
 unanticipated AYA HIV treatment priorities (eg, drug holidays,
 Received 17 April 2023 transition from adolescent to adult services). We revised
 Accepted 1 October 2023 intervention content, peer navigator training materials and
 study inclusion criteria in response to findings. The youth-­led
 HCD workshop was highly acceptable to participants.
 © Author(s) (or their Conclusions Research employing HCD among youth can
 employer(s)) 2023. Re-­use improve interventions preimplementation through empathy,
 permitted under CC BY-­NC. No youth-­led inquiry and real-­time problem solving. Peer
 commercial re-­use. See rights navigation may be most influential in improving retention
 and permissions. Published by when engagement with young people is based on mutual
 BMJ.
 trust, respect, privacy and extends beyond HIV-­specific
 For numbered affiliations see support. Identifying opportunities for personalisation and
 end of article.
 adaptation within intervention delivery is important for
 
<section> Correspondence to AYAs. Patient engagement interventions that target young
 Dr Laura K Beres; people should prioritise improved transition between
 l aura.​beres@ hu.​edu youth and adult services, youth HIV status disclosure, AYA
 
<section> to improving
 
<section> human-­
 
<section> and outcomes in a
 
<section> County, Kenya
 
<section> 3 Jayne Lewis Kulzer, 4 Gladys Ontuga,
 Nyagesoa, 1 Joseph Osoro,
 , 1 James Nyanga,
 1 Evelyn Ododa, 1 Eunice Omondi,
 1,7 Zachary Arochi Kwena,
 A Bukusi, 1 Elvin H Geng,
 
<section> WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC
 
<section> ⇒ Innovative approaches to facilitate improved adoles-
 cent and young adult engagement in HIV care are
 urgently needed to reduce morbidity and mortality.
 
<section> WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
 
<section> ⇒ This study presents a novel application of a phased,
 youth-­ led, human-­ centred design approach to
 enhance HIV retention interventions in Kenya. It
 demonstrates human-­centred design (HCD) work-
 shop acceptability, youth-­led priority identification
 and development of concrete, unique solutions
 related to HIV treatment engagement for pretrial
 implementation.
 
<section> HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH,
 
<section> PRACTICE OR POLICY
 
<section> ⇒ This study demonstrates how to engage prior re-
 search to inform design questions, leverage un-
 derlying participatory methodologies to collect data
 in research-­based HCD with youth, and systemat-
 ically approach iterative translation of findings into
 empathy-­ informed research adaptations. Youth
 prioritisation of personalisation, supportive relation-
 ship quality, self-­management and decision-­making
 advance the person-­centred care agenda in HIV ser-
 vice provision.
 
<section> empowerment and healthcare worker responsiveness in
 interactions and episodic adherence interruptions.
 
<section> INTRODUCTION
 Innovations in HIV service delivery are
 needed to reduce persistent high attrition,
 viral failure and mortality among adolescents
 and young adults (AYAs) living with HIV. 1–3 
<section> The United Nations define AYAs as youths aged 15–24
 years. 4 Notably, lost to follow-­up after starting antiret-
 roviral therapy (ART) and viral failure are 25%–50%
 higher among AYAs than adults. 1–3 Compared with
 adults, AYAs face more diverse and amplified barriers to
 adherence and retention. As a result, HIV is a key driver
 of deaths among AYAs in Africa. 5 Current service delivery
 approaches, often designed by adults, fail to accommo-
 date AYA-­ specific barriers and strengths, and are less
 effective for this age group. 3 6 AYAs are the experts on
 themselves but are frequently excluded from efforts to
 improve services. There is an urgent need to meaning-
 fully engage AYAs in designing and implementing reten-
 tion interventions and services to respond to their unique
 needs and preferences. 7
 Several studies from low-­income and middle-­income
 countries (LMICs) have tested interventions to improve
 HIV treatment linkage and outcomes for AYAs with
 varied success. Adolescent-­ friendly services, provider
 training, adherence support and mHealth approaches
 have shown some efficacy in increasing AYA retention in
 care and viral suppression. 9–11 However, recent systematic
 reviews of interventions to improve adherence and reten-
 tion in AYAs in LMICs note that many of these studies
 lack rigour, limiting the strength and generalisability of
 their findings. 11 12 Significant gaps remain in our under-
 standing of how to improve intervention acceptability
 and effectiveness, which youth subgroups would benefit
 most from interventional support, and when support is
 needed.
 Engaging AYAs in creating solutions to HIV care chal-
 lenges is recognised as an approach that may increase
 ownership and youth acceptance, yet established
 methods to effectively and meaningfully engage young
 people in research are limited. 12 13 Traditional trials
 often use researcher-­ designed interventions and only
 assess outcomes at trial conclusion. Formative research
 methods may more rapidly obtain youth perspectives and
 opinions yet may fail to optimally apply them if methods
 are not youth led. 14 Human-­centred design (HCD) is a
 novel, participatory and formative approach, relatively
 new in the global health research arena, to problem
 solving that may facilitate meaningful AYA involvement
 in research to improve HIV treatment outcomes. 15 HCD
 applies empathy while placing end users at the centre of
 design through highly interactive and thought-­provoking
 activities. 16 HCD approaches have been applied in HIV
 prevention intervention development 17 18 to integrate
 chronic disease care into HIV treatment and to improve
 the HIV care cascade. 19–21 Youth-­ led HCD research is
 currently limited, yet it may be vital to addressing treat-
 ment gaps for this unique population 19–21
 We used an HCD approach to tailor interventions for
 a randomised controlled trial to improve AYA retention
 and outcomes in HIV services in Kisumu County, Kenya:
 the Adaptive Strategies for Preventing and Treating
 Lapses of Retention in HIV Care for Adolescents study
 (A4A). 22 To engage AYAs in intervention design and
 improve intervention implementation pretrial, we used a
 four-­phase HCD approach cofacilitated by young people
 living with HIV. We aimed to identify opportunities to
 improve the proposed multicomponent adherence-­
 support interventions in A4A and understand AYAs
 support priorities. Additionally, we assessed the accept-
 ability of a youth-­led HCD workshop approach with AYAs
 in Kisumu County, Kenya.
 
<section> METHODS
 
<section> Study background
 The A4A study, launched in 2019 (NCT04432571),
 uses a sequential multiple assignment randomised trial
 design to optimise AYA HIV treatment engagement and
 assess the comparative effectiveness of three interven-
 tions among AYAs 14–24 years old on ART in Kisumu
 County, Kenya. 22 For more details on the study design
 and procedures please see our protocol paper. 22 Kisumu
 County is among the highest HIV burden regions in the
 country. 23 Three intervention prototypes were developed
 using prior study team research and extant literature: (1)
 electronic patient navigation (eNAV) using electronic
 communication platforms (short message system (SMS)
 messages, phone calls) combined with peer support, (2)
 in-­person patient NAV (IP-­NAV) in which peer navigators
 influence retention and adherence behaviours among
 AYAs through in-­person sessions and (3) conditional cash
 transfers (CCT), money disbursed for AYAs attending
 scheduled clinic visits and having suppressed viral loads.
 To improve the likelihood of intervention acceptability
 and effectiveness pretrial, concurrent formative research
 activities included (1) focus group discussions (FGDs)
 investigating factors influencing AYA care engagement,
 (2) a discrete choice experiment on incentive delivery
 preferences 22 and (3) a phased HCD process. AYAs were
 recruited from three high-­ volume Ministry of Health
 facilities with HIV youth-­centres serving AYAs aged 10–24
 years.
 
<section> HCD study design
 Our HCD approach included four iterative phases:
 discover, define, develop through a co-­ creation work-
 shop and deliver, guided by the Design Council’s Double
 Diamond approach 24 25 described in more detail below.
 Our study design and reporting were informed by
 the proposed guidelines for health research involving
 design.
 
<section> The design team
 The design team comprised AYA workshop facilitators,
 the research team, and a design expert. The lead youth
 facilitator (28 years old) and two co-­facilitators (24–26
 years) comfortable discussing their HIV status with
 other youth were selected among adolescent HIV peer
 leads and collaborators from the study health facilities.
 Consistent with HCD mindsets, 27 the AYA facilitators (two
 male, one female) demonstrated good group facilitation
 skills, flexibility, optimism and creativity. The research 
<section> team included individuals from Kenya and the USA with
 expertise in paediatrics, adolescent sexual and reproduc-
 tive health, HIV medicine, nursing, public health, social
 science and qualitative research; the design expert was
 from the USA with extensive experience conducting HIV
 research and design work in SSA. All team members were
 compensated for their role and are co-­authors. Team
 composition was driven by the goal to blend content
 expertise with in-­depth understanding of local commu-
 nities. Co-­creation was guided by AYA workshop partic-
 ipants.
 
<section> Design team training
 Led by the design expert, the design team engaged in
 collaborative HCD training, preparation and implemen-
 tation over 7 months prior to the workshop. Biweekly
 didactic trainings were held over Zoom from July 2020
 to October 2020. Topics included A4A study aims; HCD
 concepts, analysis approaches and practical application
 of HCD as a research tool; codevelopment of workshop
 objectives and activities; facilitation skills; adolescent
 health and HIV; confidence, and team building. Three
 practical, in-­person trainings among Kenya-­based team
 members covered practice workshop activity facilitation
 followed by full team debriefs. Importantly, this fostered
 formal reflexivity as the design team discussed their
 perspectives on the HCD questions prior to working with
 the AYA participants in the workshop.
 
<section> Study procedures
 Discover phase (March 2020–April 2020)
 
<section> Drawing on: (1) knowledge and experience from deliv-
 ering patient engagement and other HIV interven-
 tions in the region, (2) existing data from prior studies
 conducted by this research team and (3) extant literature,
 the research team mapped out key insights related to the
 
<section> A4A-­ proposed interventions: E-­ NAV, IP-­ NAV, CCT. 28
 The team systematically brainstormed and documented
 answers to the questions: ‘what do we already know?’
 and ‘what do we need to learn more about?’ to formally
 reflect on perceived areas of strengths and potential
 gaps in how the interventions might improve AYA HIV
 treatment engagement. The areas identified for further
 learning represented design opportunities for explora-
 tion in the Define phase.
 
<section> Define phase (April 2020–September 2020)
 Building on the discover phase, the research team iden-
 tified specific design challenges (HCD research ques-
 tions). Through discussion, we generated 18 ‘how might
 we…?’ questions targeting anticipated intervention
 effectiveness gaps. 30 Using grouping, rating and ranking
 according to significance and relevance of knowledge
 gaps, the research team selected six initial core questions
 to address during the workshop (table 1). In consulta-
 tion with the design team, including the AYA workshop
 cofacilitators, the HCD expert developed participatory
 design activities for each question to engage AYAs in
 discovery, ideation and co-­ creation during the work-
 shop and created facilitation guides for each activity. She
 drew on underlying qualitative, participatory and design
 methods to create activity options tailored to the design
 opportunities and context (table 1). The Kenya-­based
 design team reviewed activity options, selected the most
 preferred, and ensured contextual and cultural appropri-
 ateness. Example activities included journey maps, role
 plays, storytelling and ‘tomorrow’s headlines’ (table 1).
 The facilitators internally pilot tested and refined activ-
 ities before the workshop. Questions and activities were
 influenced by FGD and DCE work through overlap of
 research team staff conducting data collection and anal-
 ysis and iterative discussion of results as they were avail-
 able.
 
<section> Develop phase (October 2020–December 2020)
 Our primary co-­creation activities to improve the eNAV,
 IP-­NAV and CCT interventions were conducted during a
 4-­day design workshop held in October 2020. Specifically,
 the design workshop aimed to (1) build empathy and
 understanding around engagement and viral suppres-
 sion between the study team and AYAs; (2) co-­create solu-
 tions to anticipated HIV retention challenges through
 adapting the planned A4A study interventions and (3)
 identify AYA-­ led priorities to which the study should
 respond, iterating on the discover and define phases.
 The HCD workshop was AYA-­led with adult co-­facilitator
 support.
 
<section> Participant selection
 HCD workshop participants included (1) purposefully
 sampled AYAs willing to participate and discuss their HIV
 status and (2) peer navigator implementers of the e-­Nav
 and IP-­Nav interventions, who were also AYAs openly on
 ART. The first group were drawn from the three study
 clinics and AYA study FGD participants. We purposefully
 sampled for variation in gender, age and childbearing
 history. 31 Trained research staff members contacted
 eligible participants by phone or at clinic and conducted
 verbal informed consent procedures for interested AYAs
 and assent for caregivers of AYAs <18 years old.
 
<section> Data collection, real-time analysis and documentation
 Workshop facilitators led the design activities, which
 were adapted in real-­time based on participant feedback
 (online supplemental appendix A : workshop agenda)
 and yielded visualised outputs (e.g., pictures, collages,
 etc) (online supplemental appendix B: photo images
 of workshop activities). On completion of each activity,
 facilitators fostered large group discussions using activity-­
 specific guiding questions to support reflection, articula-
 tion of design or prototype-­refinement ideas based on the
 activity results and synthesis, written on flip charts. Partic-
 ipants wrote down their thoughts on the most important
 take-­ away from each activity (participant insight state-
 ments). A qualitatively trained researcher took workshop
 ethnographic field notes. 
<insert> Table 1 Overview of human-­centred design extant knowledge, planned research questions and design activities
 Discover Define Develop
 Extant Insights from prior
 research and experience
 Key research questions
 (How might we…?)
 ► Peer influences are powerful.
 ► Building trust between AYAs
 and navigators is essential.
 How might we facilitate
 peer navigators to be
 influential with AYAs they
 are supporting?
 The Ideal: Participant create Analogy 27
 visual composite representations
 of qualities AYAs value in others
 (sexual partner, healthcare worker,
 parent, friend).
 ► Threats to effective electronic
 peer support delivery: access,
 content, voice tone, delivery
 frequency.
 How might we provide
 consistent peer support
 for AYA who have limited
 phone access or are in
 boarding schools?
 Role plays: Participants write and
 act out short dramas responding
 to provided scenarios. Allows for
 creativity, emotion, humour and
 movement to explore topics and
 generate creative solutions.
 Storytelling 53–55 ► Sense-­making.
 ► Empathy
 development.
 ► Creative problem
 solving.
 ► Potential differences in
 preferences around cash
 transfer between age groups/
 other AYA characteristics.
 ► Funds amount needs to cover
 transport, be motivating but
 not excessive.
 How might we structure
 incentives to best
 motivate AYAs to stay in
 HIV care and be virally
 suppressed?
 Incentives prototypes: Present
 prototypes (models) of incentive
 delivery to AYAs. Discuss
 preferences on key prototype
 features.
 Rapid, iterative
 refinement 27 50
 ► Co-­creation
 of improved
 intervention
 models.
 Workshop design activity
 Participatory Purpose of activity/
 method underlying expected activity
 activity outcomes
 ► Care engagement influenced How might we structure Experience (Journey) Map: Narrative
 by marital status, childbearing, the intervention to Small groups create a step-­by-­ synthesis. 53–55
 age. respond to needs of step storyboard and context for: A
 ► AYAs are not a homogenous specific groups (pregnant, health facility visit for AYAs living
 group age groups, gender)? with HIV.
 ► Revealed
 preferences.
 ► Empathy
 development.
 ► Sense-­making.
 ► Revealed
 preferences.
 ► Prioritisation.
 Tomorrow’s headline: Participants Visioning 27
 draw hypothetical news stories on
 what positive change has been
 realised and how it was realised
 ► Creative problem
 solving.
 ► Prioritisation
 ► Social network influence How might we support
 among AYAs which may affect AYAs to engage with
 care engagement. their social networks
 to support HIV care
 engagement?
 Building a bridge: Participants Storytelling,
 voluntarily relate a challenging Mapping. 55 57
 time and connect the people who
 helped them to planks of a bridge
 built to cross a river.
 ► Sense-­making
 ► Empathy
 development
 ► Social network
 mapping
 ► Voluntary disclosure supports
 care engagement.
 ► AYAs face stigma and
 other difficulties with status
 disclosure.
 Disclosure vignettes: Facilitators Case studies.
 read out realistic but fictional Narrative
 short stories then elicit participant synthesis. 27 54 55
 reactions.
 ► Revealed
 preferences.
 ► Prioritisation
 ► Creative problem
 solving
 ► AYAs need providers who
 are understanding and
 supportive of the unique
 needs of adolescents, yet not
 all providers are trained/well
 trained/experienced in youth
 friendly service provision
 How might we empower
 AYAs to interact with
 providers to meet their
 needs?
 How might we provide
 navigation support that
 allows AYAs to disclose
 safely and to support and
 strengthen adherence
 when disclosure is not
 possible?
 AYA, adolescent and young adult. 
<iend>

 
<section> BMJ Global Health
 
<section> To assess participant workshop experience and accept-
 ability, we conducted a 10-­ question, anonymous, indi-
 vidual participant survey self-­administered on a tablet
 computer at workshop conclusion.
 
<section> Deliver phase (December 2020–April 2021)
 Informed by conclusions drawn from the first three HCD
 phases including FGD and DCE results, the full design
 and trial investigator teams reviewed and brainstormed
 trial adaptations, prioritised actions and noted concerns
 not addressed by the trial but critical to share with other
 stakeholders. High-­level trial adaptation decisions were
 made through dialogue and trial investigator team
 consensus, led by principal investigators. Modifications
 are being tested, in the A4A trial that started in 2021 and
 will conclude in 2024 (figure 1). Peer navigator HCD
 participants were among the trial intervention imple-
 menters, allowing for ongoing reflection and iteration on
 intervention standard operating procedures and delivery
 during formal Navigator debriefs, refresher trainings and
 administrative study reviews.
 
<section> Data analysis
 
<section> During workshop analysis
 After each workshop day, the full design team held
 structured debriefs over Zoom lasting approximately 
<insert> Figure 1 HCD phases, key activities, timeline. HCD, human-­centred 
<iend>

 
<section> 1–1.5 hours. These sessions included (1) General reflec-
 tions and ways to improve the workshop in subsequent
 days, (2) For each activity: rapid review of activity-­related
 data; documentation of high-­level insights guided by ques-
 tions such as ‘What seemed important?’, ‘What surprised
 you?’, ‘What confirmed what you already knew?’, ‘What
 was consistent?’, ‘What was confusing or conflictual?, (3)
 Rapid identification of design opportunities using brain-
 storming, affinity clustering and dialogue, 33 (4) Reflec-
 tion on emerging AYA-­led priorities requiring further
 exploration and (5) Agreement on subsequent day
 agenda revisions to ensure responsiveness to emerging
 priorities and design insights. While priority ‘How might
 we…?’ questions guided initial activity plans, insights
 and priorities for intervention adaptations were not
 restricted to specific activities or questions. Key insights,
 new questions and trial adaptation ideas were informed
 by the entirety of the workshop activities and dialogue,
 including ongoing empathy development throughout.
 Debrief results were summarised in a report. Initial find-
 ings were shared with AYAs during the workshop for feed-
 back and refinement.
 
<section> Postworkshop analysis
 Postworkshop, the full design team held two analysis
 sessions over Zoom lasting approximately 2 hours each.
 Rapid thematic analysis was conducted through iterative
 workshop data review, dialogue and affinity mapping.
 Clustered themes were categorised to elucidate higher
 level insights. Results were compared with ethno-
 graphic field notes for confirmation and identification
 
<section> BMJ Global Health
 
<section> design.
 
<section> of omissions. Results and interpretation were influenced
 by FGD and DCE results through overlap in study staff
 across data collection activities and formal discussion.
 Thematic insights were documented in translation tables
 applying abductive thinking 35 to systematically identify
 trial intervention adaptations and linking in-­workshop
 results. 36 The research and facilitation teams iteratively
 contributed adaptation ideas for each of the key insights
 through in-­person meetings and asynchronous contribu-
 tions to a document over approximately 2 months.
 
<section> Patient involvement
 Patients were involved in the design and conduct of
 this research. Two cofacilitators (24–26 years) comfort-
 able discussing their HIV status and AYAs on HIV care
 and treatment at study facilities were actively involved
 in codesign activities and iteration of patient retention
 interventions in the study. The two AYA cofacilitators
 were actively involved in conducting the HCD workshop,
 data analysis and reporting, and disseminating findings
 from the workshop to the study team and health facilities.
 
<section> RESULTS
 
<section> Overview
 
<section> Workshop results and intervention adaptations are
 reported by the three A4A trial interventions that
 include E-­Nav, IP-­Nav and CCT for ease of interpretation. 
<insert> Table 2 Example thematic insights and trial adaptations (abbreviated translation table)
 Key research questions
 (how might we…?) Key workshop-­derived insights Trial action/adaptation
 How might we facilitate peer
 navigators to be influential with
 AYAs they are supporting?
 ► AYAs wanted to feel appreciated, not judged.
 ► AYAs valued having a peer navigator who
 could ‘walk with them’ by sharing empathetic
 experiences.
 ► AYAs wanted to engage on topics other than HIV.
 ► AYAs valued professional appearance.
 ► Pretrial navigator training adapted to emphasise
 empathy and storytelling, and professional
 appearance during visits.
 ► Peer navigator training included sexual
 reproductive health and relationship education
 modules with appropriate referral options.
 How might we provide
 consistent peer support for
 AYAs who have limited phone
 access or are in boarding
 schools?
 ► AYAs go through trusted adults to access phones
 or communicate through in-­person visits.
 ► Modified study protocol to include AYAs with no
 mobile phone access in the control arm, which
 allowed them to be eligible for re-­randomisation
 to one of the more intensive interventions
 including IP-­Nav and CCT.
 How might we structure the ► Confidentiality and privacy are paramount. AYAs
 intervention to respond to needs preferred untraceable messages sent in coded
 of specific groups (pregnant, language that avoid words like ‘HIV’, ‘viral load’
 age groups, gender)? ► Concern about too frequent communication.
 ► AYAs have personal preferences: each one would
 like engagement responsive to those preferences.
 ► Modified study text messaging architecture to
 ensure messages sent were not traceable.
 ► Harmonised message content with AYA
 preferences for coded language
 ► Study protocol changed to reduce planned
 message frequency.
 ► Peer navigators trained to assess and respond
 to individual-­level messaging preferences (eg,
 option booster communication if desired).
 How might we empower AYAs
 to interact with providers to
 meet their needs?
 Inductive priority that arose
 during workshop: How might
 we improve the required AYAs
 experiences of transition to
 adult HIV services?:
 ► AYAs wanted to increase their own skills in
 interacting with clinic-­based, adult healthcare
 workers.
 ► Enhanced the peer navigator training with role
 plays on self-­management skills for capacity
 building AYAs to interact with clinics and
 providers to meet their needs.
 ► Transition from adolescent to adult services is a ► Even though outside study scope, training
 significant area of concern and possible disruption. on transition integrated into peer navigator
 intervention sessions.
 ► Findings, including suggestions for peer-­group
 transition and early awareness of transition
 shared with facility-­level stakeholders.
 AYA, adolescent and young adult; CCT, conditional cash transfer; IP-­Nav, in-­person patient navigation. 
<iend>

 
<insert> Table 3 Participant characteristics (n=22)
 Males (%) Females (%) Total (%)
 Age group (years)
  14–17 4 (36.4) 4 (36.4) 8 (36.4)
  18–24 7 (63.6) 6 (54.5) 13 (59.1)
 1 (9.1) 1 (4.5)
 7 (63.6)
 4 (36.4)
 14 (63.6)
 8 (36.4)
  25–27
 Participant role
  Clinic patient
  IP or E-­navigators
 7 (63.6)
 4 (36.4)
 IP, in-­person patient navigation. 
<iend>

 
<section> BMJ Global Health
 
<section> Examples of trial intervention adaptations resulting from
 the workshop are described below, highlights in table
 Twenty-­two participants engaged in the 4-­day workshop
 (table 3). Co-­creation activities yielded specific recom-
 mendations for improving planned interventions, critical
 principles to employ across interventions, and identifica-
 tion of additional AYA HIV treatment engagement prior-
 ities (online supplemental appendix B: photo images of
 workshop activities).
 
<section> Workshop results and proposed adaptations for trial
 
<section> interventions
 
<section> Electronic navigation
 The proposed E-­ Nav intervention involved electronic
 communication (SMS messages, phone calls) to provide
 peer support for AYA engagement in HIV care. The code-
 sign workshop revealed that AYAs preferred less frequent
 communication than initially planned. AYAs concerns
 included message fatigue and competing school demands.
 We modified the study protocol, reducing communica-
 tion frequency between E-­NAVs and AYAs from weekly
 to every 2 weeks for the first 2 months of intervention
 assignment, then monthly, with an option for additional
 sessions as desired by the individual participant.
 AYAs emphasised that confidentiality and privacy
 were critical to navigator communication acceptability.
 
<section> AYAs desired text messages that: (1) were not traceable,
 eliminating the possibility of accidental or intentional
 discovery of the message origin and (2) used coded
 language (eg, avoided words such as ‘HIV’, ‘viral load’,
 ‘clinic appointment’). Further, through conversations
 about the importance of AYAs being seen holistically,
 beyond the lens of HIV, AYAs expressed a desire to receive
 messages related to life priorities and events outside of 
<section> HIV. For example, encouragement if they performed
 poorly on a test at school or sending birthday wishes. We
 revised the HCD workshop agenda to include partici-
 pants creating actual messages e-­Navigators might send
 to participants covering the range of topics and types of
 language they might appreciate. Additionally, we modi-
 fied our text messaging architecture to ensure messages
 sent were not traceable and harmonised message content
 with preferences.
 Our original trial eligibility criteria excluded AYAs
 without access to mobile phones, (eg, in boarding schools
 where phone access is curtailed) because of seemingly
 critical logistical barriers to the phone-­delivered E-­Nav
 arm. However, workshop findings demonstrated the
 exceptional characteristics and circumstances of AYAs
 who have limited access to mobile phones, underlined
 the importance of including them and problem solved
 options for engaging them such as youth-­led connec-
 tions to trusted boarding school educators with phones
 or communicating during permitted phone access
 windows. However, it was noted that delivery of E-­Nav
 would remain limited in this subgroup as biweekly or
 even monthly communication would be impossible. Our
 study protocol was modified to include AYAs without
 mobile phone access, starting them in the control arm
 which allowed them to be eligible for re-­randomisation
 to IP-­Nav or CCT.
 
<section> In-person navigation
 The proposed IP-­Nav involved in-­person sessions with
 peer navigators to influence retention and adherence
 behaviours among AYAs. Acknowledging that not all peer
 navigators will necessarily be influential to all AYAs, the
 workshop identified opportunities to improve positive
 peer navigator influence. Codesign workshop partici-
 pants highlighted the importance of feeling appreciated
 and having non-­judgemental navigators who are vested
 in the preferences, experiences and goals of AYAs. They
 also desired empathetic navigators who can ‘walk with
 them’; and are open about sharing their lived experi-
 ences with HIV treatment. Additionally, they preferred
 navigators who can comfortably discuss health topics
 other than HIV, such as sex and sexuality, family plan-
 ning, life skills and relationships. They also expressed a
 strong preference for navigators who demonstrate a high
 level of personal hygiene and neatness. Many participants
 expressed a desire to have IP-­Navigators share informal
 recreational time in addition to specific HIV counsel-
 ling (eg, playing a sport together or meeting caregivers/
 dependents). However, some older participants strongly
 preferred limited interaction time to accommodate busy
 schedules.
 In response, the pretrial peer navigator training
 modules were modified to further emphasise active
 listening skills, facilitation skills, motivational inter-
 viewing, support discussion of non-­HIV or health-­related
 interests and sexual reproductive health and relationship
 education modules with appropriate referral options.
 The navigator training was adapted to encourage open-
 ness, empathy and equip them with the story-­ telling
 skills to share treatment experiences and challenges as
 learning points, and to emphasise the importance of
 professional appearance when meeting with AYAs. Based
 on prior peer educator experiences, the research team
 felt that encouraging external unstructured interactions
 outside of study procedures could be problematic in
 terms of maintaining professional boundaries and future
 scalability. Therefore, this recommendation was not
 adopted.
 Additionally, participants preferred IP-­ Navigators of
 the same gender, particularly in boarding schools with
 gender-­segregated environments that extend to visitors.
 AYAs preferred minimising IP-­Navigator changes once
 assigned. Gender-­matching was previously planned; We
 amended study procedures to avoid navigator switches
 whenever possible.
 Across e-­ NAV and IP-­ NAV, the importance of navi-
 gators building trust with the AYAs and demonstrating
 themselves to be trustworthy arose. This included naviga-
 tors supporting AYAs and in developing the skills needed
 to self-­manage their HIV care, which was then included
 in Navigator training and re-­emphasised during debriefs
 and annual trainings.
 
<section> Conditional cash transfer
 Realtime feedback on CCT prototypes largely
 endorsed the original plan including amount, delivery
 method and timing. However, two themes related to
 CCT arose. Some AYAs expressed a strong desire for
 confidentiality in who received the incentives, while
 others felt it was okay for their parents and guardians
 to know if they received an incentive. AYAs advocating
 confidentiality asserted, ‘funds should be given under
 water’ (ie, given in secret). Flexibility was consistent
 with the original study protocol, allowing incentives
 to be given either directly to the AYAs or to someone
 the AYAs designated. Caregiver notification was not
 required (though participants under 18 years had
 caregiver study consent which explained cash incen-
 tives may occur). In response to this topic, pretrial
 training materials around incentives further empha-
 sised discretion. Additionally, there was a strong senti-
 ment among HCD participants that viral suppression
 should not be incentivised, undercutting the study
 intent. Participants were concerned that: (1) missing
 an opportunity to receive an incentive would add
 shame and a feeling of punishment to the stress of
 having an unsuppressed viral load, (2) if friends knew
 they were in the study and were planning to use the
 extra funds in a social setting, not having the funds
 would reveal their unsuppressed status and cause
 social discomfort and (3) some viral failure may be
 outside of the control of the participant if related
 to drug resistance and would be unfair to withhold
 funds. Participants felt incentivising clinic visits
 would be more appropriate. The study team discussed 
<section> the HCD results with care and attention. Ultimately,
 it was decided that the potential benefit of improving
 viral suppression with incentives, supported by extant
 literature but untested in this population, was worth
 investigating. Measures to attend to the very real
 concerns of the AYAs included training and documen-
 tation procedures to ensure incentive distribution was
 private and not discussed among study staff members
 or outside of the study and incentives were based on
 a combination of viral suppression and clinic attend-
 ance; further, questions around confidentiality and
 shame were added to the post-­t rial FGDs around the
 participant CCT experience to continue learning and
 improve future CCT use.
 
<section> Principles to employ across interventions
 
<section> Personalisation
 Throughout the workshop, a strong theme around the
 desire to have interventions tailored to individual pref-
 erences as much as possible was present. For example:
 choosing cash or mobile money for CCT receipt, timing
 of SMS message receipt in e-­Nav, and choosing optional
 additional interactions or content areas for discussion
 in IP-­NAV. In response, we modified our study standard
 operating procedures to include flexibility when possible
 and the navigator training curriculum to build navigator
 capacity to explore AYA preferences.
 
<section> AYA empowerment
 Participants expressed a desire to improve interac-
 tions with clinic-­b ased, adult healthcare workers. In
 response, Navigator training was revised to include
 assertiveness trainings and role plays on how navi-
 gators can build AYA capacity in patient–provider
 communication, expressing their challenges and
 asking targeted questions to better understand and
 self-­m anage their health.
 
<section> Emergent themes
 
<section> AYA awareness of HIV status
 During the workshop, AYAs emphasised the importance
 of being aware of their own HIV status. Specifically,
 they expressed concerns about not being informed of
 their HIV status and believed that healthcare workers
 and caregivers should be responsible for disclosing this
 information to them rather than leaving it for them to
 discover on their own. Knowledge of status is critical
 to a young person taking responsibility and garnering
 support. While facilitating disclosure directly was outside
 of the scope of the study as disclosure was an eligibility
 criteria to enrol, the study team included these findings
 in feedback presentations to the clinic on study results
 and revised the navigator training to include postdisclo-
 sure support skills.
 
<section> Drug holidays
 
<section> AYAs described ‘drug holidays’ as periods when they
 decide to stop taking their ART for certain durations and
 for reasons that include school schedules, stigma (fear
 of others seeing them take their medication), peer pres-
 sure, visitors at home, food insecurity, a feeling of good
 health, ‘no reason’ and pill burden. The research team
 was aware of drug holidays but was surprised by how this
 term was widely applied to normalised non-­adherence.
 Drug holiday assessments were added to navigator
 training and study intervention forms. Navigators were
 trained to provide non-­judgemental support for AYAs
 who discussed drug holidays or intermittent medication
 adherence, as well as counselling around benefits for
 all AYAs (including the navigators themselves) to main-
 taining continual adherence.
 
<section> Importance of transition in AYA retention
 Through 18 years of age, routine services at the health
 facilities are provided through a youth-­friendly adoles-
 cent centre. When AYAs>18 years transitioned to the
 adult clinic, they described an impersonal, busier, setting
 with few peer interactions. The challenge of this tran-
 sition was raised by participants and emphasised as a
 critical concern. During an added session on this topic
 participants expressed a strong desire for more support
 to help AYAs prepare emotionally and better understand
 how to navigate the adult clinic. Solutions included AYAs
 being informed about the need to transition prior to age
 16 years and transitioning with a group of peers to ease
 the shift. While not an outcome of the A4A study, the
 research team opted to integrate training on transition
 and incorporate transition issues in Navigator interven-
 tion sessions. Further, the team shared these findings
 during feedback presentations to the study clinics.
 
<section> Youth-led HCD workshop acceptability
 Engaging AYAs as codesigners in a workshop-­ based
 approach was feasible and well-­received by participants.
 Twenty-­ one of the participants completed the post-
 workshop survey, with 100% indicating the workshop
 met their expectations. The workshop content, mix of
 activities and quality of the facilitation team was rated
 ‘outstanding’ (means: 4.6, 4.4 and 4.4, respectively, on a
 1–5 Likert scale). All but one participant reported they
 would recommend the workshop to others. Different
 workshop sessions appealed to different AYAs, with at
 least 20% of participants rating each of the eight main
 activities as one of their top three favourites. Elicited
 specific improvement suggestions included having more
 time for the workshop, an improved venue, reducing the
 amount of writing participants did and, most frequently,
 ‘no changes’ (n=10). The workshop produced results
 relevant to each of the study ‘how might we…?’ questions
 and allowed for participant-­driven inquiry.
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 
<section> An HCD approach cofacilitated by youth provided an
 acceptable and engaging opportunity for youth-­driven
 inquiry, offering specific, unique solutions and key prior-
 ities and principles to improve care engagement inter-
 vention design pretrial. 
<section> Previous text message research with adult populations
 including pregnant women, lay health workers and men
 receiving medical circumcision 37–40 informed initial
 e-­NAV design. Lessons from HCD yielded key modifica-
 tions in our approach to delivering texting interventions
 to AYAs including altering our messaging architecture to
 ensure untraceable messages, tailoring message to include
 non-­HIV life priorities, the use of coded language for
 confidentiality, and reducing message frequency. While
 consistent with considerations for AYAs text messaging
 in other research, 41 42 our HCD approach allowed for
 real-­ time creation of meaningful messages by youth,
 improving intervention face and content validity. Despite
 AYAs in boarding schools being described as higher risk
 groups for poor HIV treatment outcomes, 43 44 consistent
 with findings from other studies, we observed the impact
 of limited access to mobile phones as an obstacle to deliv-
 ering patient retention interventions among them. Our
 design workshop problem solving identified specific,
 unique ways of engaging AYAs with limited phone access.
 While not all these solutions met trial intervention dose
 requirements, the HCD approach engaged research
 team empathy, reinforcing the importance of being as
 inclusive as possible and expanding eligibility criteria.
 Other m-­health projects with AYAs should consider both
 creative solutions to phone access and potential limita-
 tions of m-­health delivery in this key population.
 Our study revealed that peer navigation might be most
 influential in improving retention when engagement
 with young people is based on mutual trust and extends
 beyond HIV-­ specific support. While unsurprising and
 consistent with extant literature demonstrating the
 impact of health provider empathy and confidentiality
 on adolescent trust, 45 this highlights that establishing and
 managing relational aspects of peer navigator interven-
 tions may be as important as peer navigator activities (eg,
 information sharing, accompanying to clinics). Further,
 our HCD approach allowed AYAs to lead the dialogue,
 specifying ways to demonstrate trust worthiness, such as
 supporting AYAs in developing self-­management skills.
 Our findings also support increasing calls for patient-­
 centredness of HIV care provision across interactions
 with the health facility, with attention given to patient–
 provider relationships, integration of medical and non-­
 medical care, support for patient involvement in care
 and enhanced provider–patient communication. 3 AYAs
 highlighted that responsiveness to their personalised
 preferences whenever possible was important to them.
 For example, they preferred to decide the frequency
 of communication with navigators, the range of topics
 discussed and suggested incentive disbursement to be
 individualised. Both research trials and programmes
 seeking to engage young people might consider, where
 feasible, points of personalisation, how to discern pref-
 erences or offer choice, and respond to those choices
 within available resources or structures. 46 47 Adaptations
 emerging from the HCD process may signal important
 information to discern causal mechanisms in intervention
 effectiveness. Therefore, documentation of adaptations
 in intervention delivery and future exploration of how
 these adaptations impacted outcomes may inform other
 youth-­focused strategies.
 The iterative nature of HCD, length of interaction
 (4 days) building comfort, and explicit support for
 youth-­led topics allowed key AYA priorities to emerge
 such as timing of adult to child status disclosure, support
 for AYAs status disclosure to others, successful transition
 from adolescent to adult services, and empowering AYAs
 to improve patient–provider interactions. Engaging AYAs
 as coresearchers along with the expansive, divergent
 nature of the HCD thinking allowed ‘drug holidays’, a
 culturally meaningful situation seemingly antithetical
 to a study focused on improving adherence, to arise for
 consideration in a way that would be less likely using other
 research methods. 49 AYAs demonstrated heterogeneity in
 their workshop activity preferences, with at least 20% of
 participants rating each of the eight main activities as one
 of their top three favourites. Likely influenced by AYA
 co-­leadership in workshop planning, this demonstrates
 good fit between co-­creation activities and the participant
 group. Additionally, it suggests the importance of variety
 in co-­creation approaches to appeal to variation in partic-
 ipant preferences. From the research team perspective,
 valuable insights came out from each activity.
 This work demonstrates an important research-­based
 application of a phased HCD approach: formal, inten-
 sive and interactive reflection to document existing
 knowledge and gaps from relevant research settings
 and populations during the Discover phase, guiding the
 remaining phases. Much HCD guidance assumes limited
 extant knowledge of the topic and setting as HCD begins
 and, thus, encourages use of basic and very open-­ended
 discussions and observations in the discover phase that
 may be either resource-­intensive or limited in breadth
 and depth. 50 Many academic researchers familiar with
 a research topic tend to review extant knowledge infor-
 mally, rapidly and with minimal stakeholder engagement
 during study planning and implementation, resulting in
 limited application of existing knowledge to inform inter-
 vention development. While this traditional approach
 may have sufficient value for a given process, our team’s
 application of formal, iterative documentation, dialogue
 and review during discovery has distinct benefits. Our
 team’s approach allowed for efficient yet thorough
 consideration of extant knowledge and prioritisation of
 knowledge gaps, systematic pairing of design activities
 with priority topics, and a structure to augment abductive
 thinking during solution generation. The study balanced
 drawing on past research and experience among AYAs
 in this setting to guide design questions with allowing
 for within study youth-­driven inquiry. It also benefited
 from iteration between the study phases including knowl-
 edge from concurrent DCE and FGD research. The rele-
 vance of the knowledge documented in discover and the
 resulting questions generated in define were supported
 by the AYAs positive reception of the workshop topics, 
<section> broad learning about study areas of interest across ‘how
 might we…?’ questions, few but meaningful inductive
 workshop topics, and salient pretrial adaptations resulting
 from the develop phase. This systematic approach to
 discover would be appropriate for teams of researchers
 embedded in their study area, bringing significant past
 research and experience in the topic, and able to orga-
 nise a committed review group.
 Principled decision-­ making is necessary in applying
 HCD findings to research studies when not all insights can
 be accommodated. For example, the study implications
 of workshop participants’ guidance that viral suppres-
 sion should not be incentivised would have removed a
 trial arm. While significant revisions may be appropriate,
 the research team applied evidence from other settings
 and theory to maintain the incentive arm. However, the
 empathy established during the HCD process around
 incentive-­related concerns, namely that AYAs feel blamed
 for lack of suppression when it could be a resistance issue,
 led to the study instituting a process to flag and clinically
 review unsuppressed viral load results, as well as peer
 navigator training to avoid blame. Balancing study aims
 with design results is critical to HCD research, as is trans-
 parency with HCD participants. When inviting partici-
 pants into an HCD research process, it is the facilitators’
 responsibility to ensure that participants are advised that
 not all solutions will be adopted and that participants be
 given information to help them understand the scope of
 the research. 26 33 Future analysis of intervention effective-
 ness will explore the impact of recommended adapta-
 tions that were not possible to include through qualitative
 interviews and intervention satisfaction surveys.
 
<section> Limitations
 
<section> While the broad HCD approach incorporated AYA-­
 involved iteration on the study design across formative
 methods (ie, FGDs, DCE and HCD workshop) and over
 time (eg, HCD phases and peer navigator workshop
 participants working as intervention implementers which
 allowed ongoing reflection and adaptation during the
 trial), iteration on specific design elements by all AYA
 participants was limited to the 4-­day workshop. The inclu-
 sion of both peer navigator intervention implementers
 living with HIV and AYAs with characteristics consistent
 with expected trial enrollees allowed for multiple inter-
 vention design perspectives. However, AYAs who were not
 peer navigators may have felt less knowledgeable or open
 to share their experiences. Workshop facilitators used
 small groups, anonymous individual sharing methods
 such as post-­it notes, and other facilitation techniques
 to support equal participation. Participants were willing
 to openly discuss living with HIV, literate in Kiswahili or
 English, and able to create time to attend the workshop.
 They may have greater resource access than other AYAs
 who would benefit from HIV retention support. Study
 results may be applicable and informative for trans-
 ferable settings with similar key characteristics such as
 health systems, HIV epidemiology, research experience
 and youth population characteristics.
 
<section> CONCLUSIONS
 Compared with more traditional qualitative research
 methods, our youth-­led HCD approach supported AYA-­
 driven inquiry; specific, unique, real-­ time problem
 solving and solution creation; and rapid empathy cultiva-
 tion, proving an acceptable, rapid and effective means of
 identifying intervention-­tailoring opportunities pretrial.
 Findings highlight that interventions supporting AYAs
 retention in HIV care and services should prioritise flex-
 ibility and individualisation to respond to AYA prefer-
 ences whenever possible. Attention to relational aspects
 of care interactions, confidentiality, episodic adherence
 interruptions and care transitions as youth age are para-
 mount.
 
<section> Author affiliations
 Centre for Microbiology Research (CMR), Kenya Medical Research Institute,
 
<section> Nairobi, Kenya
 Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
 Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of
 Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
 Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
 California, San Francisco, California, USA
 Department of Child, Family, and Population Health Nursing, University of
 Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
 Family AIDS Care and Education Services (FACES) Clinic, Kisumu, Kenya
 Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
 
<section> Missouri, USA
 Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA
 Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado, USA
 
<section> Correction notice This article has been corrected since it published online to
 include the Competing interests statement.
 
<section> Contributors EOA, LKB, LLA and JLK drafted the manuscript. EHG, LLA, EOA,
 LKB, JLK, GO, HA, SB, EOdoda, FO, COO, TO, EAB, ZK and IE-­W conceptualised and
 designed the study. EOA, LKB, JLK, GO, HA, SB, EN, JO, IO, NS, BO, JN, COO, EN,
 EOdoda, EOmondi, FO, COO, TO, ZK, IE-­W, MP, EAB, EHG and LLA contributed to
 implementation of study activities and data analysis. LLA is the study guarantor. All
 authors read, revised and approved the final manuscript.
 
<section> Funding Funding National Institute or Nursing Research, National Institutes of
 Health R01NR018801. National Institute of Mental Health 1K01MH130244 and
 National Institutes of HealthK24 AI134413.
 
<section> Competing interests Dr. Beres’ contribution to this publication was as a
 consultant to Washington University in St. Louis. This arrangement has been
 reviewed and approved by the Johns Hopkins University in accordance with its
 conflict of interest policies.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were involved in the
 design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research. Refer to
 the Methods section for further details.
 
<section> Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
 
<section> Ethics approval This study involves human participants and ethical approval for
 this study has been obtained from all relevant Institutional Review Boards (IRBs).
 In the USA, Washington University in St. Louis (IRB #202006141) is the single IRB
 of record and has reviewed and approved this study protocol, with the University of
 Colorado Denver and University of California San Francisco relying on Washington
 University in St. Louis. In Kenya, the protocol was reviewed and approved by Kenya
 Medical Research Institute’s (KEMRI) Scientific and Ethics Review Unit (SERU) (IRB
 #3986). Participants gave informed consent to participate in the study before taking
 part.
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. 
<section> Data availability statement Data are available on reasonable request. In
 accordance with our NIH-­approved data sharing plan, and in order to protect the
 privacy of the small number of participants who participate in the study, we will
 limit sharing to insights and translation tables, available upon reasonable request.
 
<section> Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has
 not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been
 peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those
 of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and
 responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content
 includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability
 of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines,
 terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error
 and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
 Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which
 permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially,
 and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
 properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the
 use is non-­commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
 
<section> ORCID iDs
 
<section> Eliud Omondi Akama http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1567-4756
 Bertha Oketch http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6537-6792
 
<section> REFERENCES
 1 Jerene D, Abebe W, Taye K, et al. Adolescents living with HIV are
 at higher risk of death and loss to follow up from care: analysis
 of cohort data from eight health facilities in Ethiopia. PLoS ONE
 2019;14:e0223655.
 2 Humphrey JM, Genberg BL, Keter A, et al. Viral suppression among
 children and their caregivers living with HIV in Western Kenya. J Int
 
<section> AIDS Soc 2019;22:e25272.
 3 Haghighat R, Toska E, Bungane N, et al. The HIV care Cascade for
 adolescents initiated on antiretroviral therapy in a health District
 of South Africa: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Infect Dis
 2021;21:60.
 4 United Nations. Youth. Available: https://www.un.org/en/global-​
 issues/youth [Accessed 25 Jul 2023].
 5 Tucker JD, Iwelunmor J, Ezechi OC. Adolescent HIV in Africa:
 linking local lives and global targets. Lancet Child Adolesc Health
 2019;3:203–4.
 6 UNICEF. The state of the world’s children 2011: adolescence an age
 
<section> of opportunity; 2011. Unicef
 7 Pettifor A, Stoner M, Pike C, et al. Adolescent lives matter:
 preventing HIV in adolescents. Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2018;13:265–73.
 8 Casale M, Carlqvist A, Cluver L. Recent interventions to improve
 retention in HIV care and adherence to antiretroviral treatment
 among adolescents and youth: A systematic review. AIDS Patient
 Care STDS 2019;33:237–52.
 9 Reif LK, Bertrand R, Benedict C, et al. Impact of a youth-­friendly HIV
 clinic: 10 years of adolescent outcomes in port-­au-­prince. J Int AIDS
 Soc 2016;19:20859.
 10 Mburu M, Guzé MA, Ong’wen P, et al. Evaluating the effectiveness
 of the HIV adolescent package of care (APOC) training on viral load
 suppression in Kenya. Public Health 2019;173:146–9.
 11 Zanoni BC, Sibaya T, Cairns C, et al. Higher retention and viral
 suppression with adolescent-­focused HIV clinic in South Africa.
 
<section> PLoS One 2017;12:e0190260.
 12 World Health Organization. Engaging young people for health and
 sustainable development: Strategic opportunities for the World
 Health Organization and partners. 2018: 1–57. Available: http://apps.​
 who.int/bookorders [accessed 3 May 2021].
 13 Jourdan D, Christensen JH, Darlington E, et al. The involvement of
 young people in School- and community-­based Noncommunicable
 disease prevention interventions: a Scoping review of designs and
 outcomes. BMC Public Health 2016;16:1123.
 14 Abuosi AA, Anaba EA. Barriers on access to and use of adolescent
 health services in Ghana. JHR 2019;33:197–207.
 15 Bazzano AN, Martin J, Hicks E, et al. Human-­centred design in
 global health: A Scoping review of applications and contexts. PLoS
 One 2017;12:e0186744.
 16 Dalberg. What is human-­centered design? Dalberg. Dalberg digital
 publication; 2020. Available: https://dalberg.com/what-is-human-​
 centered-design/%0Ahttps://www.dalberg.com/what-human-​
 
<section> 17 United States Agency for International Development, PEPFAR.
 Dapivirine Ring Design Guide: Human-­centered design research to
 increase uptake and use; 2020.
 18 Coffey PS, Kilbourne-­Brook M. Using human-­centred design to
 develop an innovative female condom. BMJ Innov 2021;7:399–406.
 19 Beres LK, Simbeza S, Holmes CB, et al. Human-­centered design
 lessons for implementation science: improving the implementation
 of a patient-­centered care intervention. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
 2019;82 Suppl 3:S230–43.
 20 Aifah A, Okeke NL, Rentrope CR, et al. Use of a human-­centered
 design approach to adapt a nurse-­led cardiovascular disease
 prevention intervention in HIV clinics. Prog Cardiovasc Dis
 2020;63:92–100.
 21 Bruns C. Using human-­centered design to develop a program to
 engage south african men living with HIV in care and treatment. Glob
 Health Sci Pract 2021;9(Suppl 2):S234–43.
 22 Abuogi LL, Kulzer JL, Akama E, et al. Adapt for adolescents:
 protocol for a sequential multiple assignment randomized trial
 to improve retention and viral suppression among adolescents
 and young adults living with HIV in Kenya. Contemp Clin Trials
 2023;127:107123.
 23 Ministry of Health. Kenya HIV County ProfIles, Available: https://​
 nsdcc.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/KenyaCountyProfiles.pdf
 [Accessed 7 Apr 2023].
 24 The New Double Diamond Design Process Is Here by Dennis
 
<section> Hambeukers Design Leadership Notebook Medium, Available:
 https://medium.com/design-leadership-notebook/the-new-​
 double-diamond-design-process-7c8f12d7945e [Accessed 9 Sep
 2021].
 25 British Design Council, UK Design Council. What is the framework
 for innovation? Design Council’s evolved Double Diamond.
 
<section> 2015: 1–5. Available: https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-​
 opinion/what-framework-innovation-design-councils-evolved-​
 
<section> double-diamond
 26 Bazzano AN, Yan SD, Martin J, et al. Improving the reporting of
 health research involving design: a proposed guideline. BMJ Glob
 Health 2020;5:e002248.
 27 The Field Guide to Human-­Centered Design, Available: https://www.​
 designkit.org/ [Accessed 24 Jan 2023].
 28 Wanga I, Helova A, Abuogi LL, et al. Acceptability of community-­
 based mentor mothers to support HIV-­positive pregnant women on
 antiretroviral treatment in Western Kenya: a qualitative study. BMC
 Pregnancy Childbirth 2019;19:288.
 29 Abuogi LL, Onono M, Odeny TA, et al. Effects of behavioural
 interventions on postpartum retention and adherence among women
 with HIV on lifelong ART: the results of a cluster randomized trial in
 Kenya (the MOTIVATE trial). J Int AIDS Soc 2022;25:e25852.
 30 Using “How Might We” Questions to Ideate on the Right Problems,
 Available: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-might-we-​
 questions/ [Accessed 24 Jan 2023].
 
<section> 31 Patton MQ. Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods3rd Edition.
 
<section> Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, Inc, 2022.
 32 Emerson RM, and IF, Shaw LL. Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes. In:
 2nd ed. Chicago, 2011.
 33 Traditional Socio-­Behavioral Research and Human-­Centered
 
<section> Design: Similarities, Unique Contributions and Synergies - The IMPT,
 Available: https://theimpt.org/traditional-socio-behavioral-research-​
 and-human-centered-design-similarities-unique-contributions-and-​
 synergies/ [Accessed 4 Feb 2023].
 34 Affinity Diagrams: How to Cluster Your Ideas and Reveal Insights,
 Available: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/​
 affinity-diagrams-learn-how-to-cluster-and-bundle-ideas-and-facts
 [Accessed 4 Feb 2023].
 35 Kolko J. Abductive thinking and Sensemaking: the drivers of design
 synthesis. Design Issues 2010;26:15–28.
 36 Haines ER, Kirk MA, Lux L, et al. Ethnography and user-­centered
 design to inform context-­driven implementation. Transl Behav Med
 2022;12:ibab077.
 37 Musoke P, Gakumo CA, Abuogi LL, et al. A text Messaging
 intervention to support option B+ in Kenya: A qualitative study.
 
<section> J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care 2018;29:287–99.
 38 Odeny TA, Hughes JP, Bukusi EA, et al. Text Messaging for
 maternal and infant retention in prevention of mother-­to-­child
 
<section> HIV transmission services: A pragmatic stepped-­wedge cluster-­
 randomized trial in Kenya. PLoS Med 2019;16:e1002924.
 39 Odeny TA, Bukusi EA, Cohen CR, et al. Texting improves testing.
 
<section> AIDS 2014;28:2307–12.
 40 Odeny TA, Bailey RC, Bukusi EA, et al. Text Messaging to
 improve attendance at post-­operative clinic visits after adult male
 circumcision for HIV prevention: A randomized controlled trial. PLoS 
<section> 41 Schnall R, Okoniewski A, Tiase V, et al. Using text Messaging
 to assess adolescents’ health information needs: an ecological
 momentary assessment. J Med Internet Res 2013;15:e54.
 42 Rana Y, Haberer J, Huang H, et al. Short message service (SMS)-­
 Based intervention to improve treatment adherence among
 
<section> HIV-­positive youth in Uganda: focus group findings. PLoS ONE
 2015;10:e0125187.
 43 Kihumuro RB, Muganzi DJ, Wandira EG, et al. Influence of boarding
 secondary school environment on HIV positive students in South
 Western Uganda. BMC Public Health 2021;21:327.
 44 Kose J, Lenz C, Akuno J, et al. Supporting adolescents
 living with HIV within boarding schools in Kenya. PLoS One
 2021;16:e0260278.
 45 Hardin HK, Bender AE, Hermann CP, et al. An integrative review of
 adolescent trust in the Healthcare provider relationship. J Adv Nurs
 2021;77:1645–55.
 46 Lei H, Nahum-­Shani I, Lynch K, et al. “A "SMART" design for
 building individualized treatment sequences”. Annu Rev Clin Psychol
 2012;8:21–48.
 47 Ryan M, Farrar S. Using conjoint analysis to elicit preferences for
 health care. BMJ 2000;320:1530–3.
 48 Wiltsey Stirman S, Baumann AA, Miller CJ. The FRAME: an
 expanded framework for reporting adaptations and modifications to
 evidence-­based interventions. Implement Sci 2019;14:58.
 49 Bergen N, Labonté R. Everything is perfect, and we have no
 problems”: detecting and limiting social desirability bias in qualitative
 research. Qual Health Res 2020;30:783–92.
 
<section> 50 Design Thinking Bootleg — Stanford d.school, Available: https://​
 dschool.stanford.edu/resources/design-thinking-bootleg [Accessed
 
<section> 22 Jul 2023].
 51 Tobin GA, Begley CM. Methodological rigour within a qualitative
 framework. J Adv Nurs 2004;48:388–96.
 52 Wood W, Quinn JM, Kashy DA. Habits in everyday life: thought,
 emotion, and action. J Pers Soc Psychol 2002;83:1281–97.
 53 Hennink M, Hutter I, Bailey A. Qualitative research methods, 2nd ed.
 
<section> SAGE Publications, 2020.
 
<section> 54 Riessman CK. Narrative Methods for the Human Sciences, 1st ed.
 
<section> Boston: SAGE Publications, 2008.
 55 Kurtz CF. Working with stories in your community or organization
 PARTICIPATORY NARRATIVE INQUIRY. In: 3rd edn. edn. New York,
 2014.
 56 Dickin K, Griffiths M, Group M, et al. Designing by dialogue: a
 program planners’ guide to consultative research for improving
 young child feeding prepared for the health and human resources
 analysis (HHRAA) project. 1997. Available: https://manoffgroup.com/​
 wp-content/uploads/Designing-by-Dialogue.pdf/ [Accessed 09 Sep
 2023].
 57 Israel BA. Methods for community-­based participatory research for
 health. 2013. Available: https://www.wiley.com/en-us/Methods+for+​
 Community+Based+Participatory+Research+for+Health%2C+2nd+​
 Edition-p-9781118021866 [Accessed 22 Jul 2023].
 58 Kretzmann JP, Mcknight JL. Introduction to “building communities
 from the inside out: A path toward finding and mobilizing a
 
<section> community’s assets;