
<section> Improving quality of
 
<section> childbirth in primary
 
<section> stepped-wedge cluster-randomised
 
<section> in India
 
<section> Ramesh Agarwal, 1 Deepak Chawla, 2 Minakshi
 Suresh K Dalpath, 5 Rakesh Gupta, 5 Saket
 Premananda Mohanty, 3 Mari Jeeva Sankar,
 Anu Thukral, 1 Suksham Jain, 2 Chandra Prakash
 Praveen Kumar, 10 Jyoti Sarin, 11 Vishnubhatla
 Yogesh Kumar, 11 Pradip Kharya, 14 Surender
 Raksha Arora, 17 Kapil Joshi, 18 Kapil Bhalla,
 Prischillal Devakirubai, 16 Ritu Samuel, 16 Reena
 Vinod Kumar Paul, 1 for the QI Haryana Study
 
<section> To cite: Agarwal R, Chawla D, Abstract
 
<section> Sharma M, et al. Improving Background Low/middle-income countries need a large-
 quality of care during scale improvement in the quality of care (QoC) around
 childbirth in primary health the time of childbirth in order to reduce high maternal,
 
<section> centres: a stepped-wedge
 fetal and neonatal mortality. However, there is a paucity of
 
<section> cluster-randomised trial
 in India. BMJ Glob Health scalable models.
 2018;3:e000907. doi:10.1136/ Methods We conducted a stepped-wedge cluster-
 bmjgh-2018-000907 randomised trial in 15 primary health centres (PHC) of
 the state of Haryana in India to test the effectiveness of
 
<section> Handling editor Valery Ridde a multipronged quality management strategy comprising
 capacity building of providers, periodic assessments
 
<section> ► Additional material is of the PHCs to identify quality gaps and undertaking
 
<section> published online only. To view
 improvement activities for closure of the gaps. The
 
<section> please visit the journal online
 (http://​dx.​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​ 21-month duration of the study was divided into seven
 bmjgh-​2018-​000907). periods (steps) of 3 months each. Starting from the
 second period, a set of randomly selected three PHCs
 (cluster) crossed over to the intervention arm for rest of
 Received 16 April 2018 the period of the study. The primary outcomes included
 Revised 14 August 2018 the number of women approaching the PHCs for
 
<section> Accepted 14 August 2018
 childbirth and 12 directly observed essential practices
 related to the childbirth. Outcomes were adjusted with
 random effect for cluster (PHC) and fixed effect for
 ‘months of intervention’.
 
<section> Results The intervention strategy led to increase in the
 
<section> © Author(s) (or their number of women approaching PHCs for childbirth (26
 employer(s)) 2018. Re-use vs 21 women per PHC-month, adjusted incidence rate
 permitted under CC BY-NC. No ratio: 1.22; 95% CI 1.17 to 1.28). Of the 12 practices,
 commercial re-use. See rights improved modestly, 2 remained near universal during both
 and permissions. Published by intervention and control periods, 3 did not change and 1
 BMJ. worsened. There was no evidence of change in mortality
 For numbered affiliations see with a majority of deaths occurring either during referral
 end of article. transport or at the referral facilities.
 
<section> Correspondence to Conclusion A multipronged quality management strategy
 Dr Vijay Kumar; enhanced utilisation of services and modestly improved
 ​1940kumarv@​gmail.​com and key practices around the time of childbirth in PHCs in India.
 Professor Vinod Kumar Paul; Trial registration number CTRI/2016/05/006963.
 
<section> ​vinodkpaul@​gmail.​com
 
<section> care during
 
<section> health centres: a
 
<section> trial
 
<section> Sharma, 3 Shyama Nagaranjan,
 Kumar, 5 Saumyadripta Chaudhuri,
 1 Krishna Agarwal, 6 Shikha Rani,
 Yadav, 8 Geeta Gathwala,
 Sreenivas, 12 Kailash C Aggarwal,
 Singh Bisht, 15 Gopal Shridhar,
 9 Aarti Soni, 19 Sube Singh,
 Yadav, 20 Rajiv Bahl, 21 Vijay Kumar,
 
<section> Collaboration
 
<section> Key questions
 
<section> What is already known?
 
<section> ► The childbirth and first 24 hours after birth contrib-
 ute to nearly half of the total stillbirths and maternal
 and neonatal deaths.
 
<section> ► Improvement in quality of care during childbirth
 and postnatal period is necessary to meet the
 Sustainable Development Goals.
 
<section> What are the new findings?
 
<section> ► A provider-led multipronged quality management
 programme with external facilitation was successful
 in improving key care practices during childbirth and
 immediate postnatal period.
 
<section> ► A large number of deficits in the quality of care
 were due to structural issues which need system
 strengthening and are difficult to address by health-
 care providers themselves.
 
<section> What do the new findings imply?
 
<section> ► Healthcare providers at small facilities should be
 trained in the methods of monitoring and addressing
 quality gaps and they should be fully supported with
 needed resources to identify and address the lacu-
 nae in quality of care.
 
<section> Introduction
 Despite significant decline in maternal and
 under-5 child deaths over last two decades,
 275 000 maternal death and 5.9 million
 under-5 deaths including 2.7 million neonatal
 deaths still occur every year, over 90% of
 them in the low/middle-income countries
 (LMIC). 1 2 Due to slower decline of neonatal
 deaths, its contribution to under-5 deaths has 
<section> increased from 36% in 1990 to 46% in 2015. 1 3 Addition-
 ally, a burden of approximately 2.1 million stillbirths
 every year, unnoticed so far, has also become a major
 concern. 3 The childbirth and first 24 hours thereafter is
 the most critical period as nearly half of total stillbirths
 and maternal and neonatal deaths occur during this
 period. 4
 Increase in institutional deliveries in India from 38.7%
 in 2005–2006 to 78.9% in 2015–2016 has not translated
 into commensurate gains in maternal and neonatal
 survival but has largely shifted the mortality burden
 from the community to the facilities. 6–8 This has been
 attributed to low quality of care (QoC) in the facili-
 ties and improving the QoC in addition to universal
 coverage of evidence-based interventions has therefore
 been identified as a key strategy to achieve Sustainable
 Development Goals of significantly reducing maternal,
 fetal and neonatal mortality by 2030. 9 Improved QoC
 is expected to save nearly 113 000 maternal deaths,
 000 stillbirths and 1 325 000 neonatal deaths every year
 globally.
 Most of the evidence on improvement in QoC has
 emanated from high-income countries, which have strong
 and functional health systems. Systematic reviews demon-
 strate dearth of good-quality evidence on interventions,
 which can improve QoC of maternal and newborn health
 in LMICs with weaker health systems. 10 Recently, a large
 cluster-randomised trial (BetterBirth study) undertaken
 in Uttar Pradesh state of India focused on implementa-
 tion of coaching-based WHO safe childbirth checklist
 (BetterBirth checklist) as a tool to drive QoC in small
 facilities. 11 The trial reported a modest improvement in
 adherence to essential practices around the time of child-
 birth but no change in perinatal deaths, maternal deaths
 or maternal severe complications.
 The QoC is a multifaceted concept which envisions
 that the clients receive good-quality evidence-based care
 (provision of care) and are also treated well (experience
 of care). Providing good QoC which is safe, timely, effec-
 tive, efficient, equitable and patient centred requires
 a robust health system. Improvement in healthcare
 processes needs ‘structure’ to be in place in the form of
 skilled and committed human resource, infrastructure,
 information system, equipment and supplies, financing,
 and leadership/governance. The Donabedian and WHO
 models emphasise the importance of both robust ‘struc-
 ture’ and ‘processes’ in order to achieve desirable health
 outcomes. 6
 We hypothesised that quality management activities
 driven by facility teams with external facilitation and
 comprising activities to build capacity of the providers,
 regular review of key inputs and outcomes to iden-
 tify gaps and closing those gaps through facility teams’
 improvement efforts will increase the uptake of essential
 practices around the time of childbirth in primary health
 centres (PHC). The improved QoC would enhance the
 faith of community and families, which would improve
 utilisation of the PHC services.
 
<section> Methods
 
<section> Context and study settings
 We conducted this stepped-wedge (SW) cluster-ran-
 domised trial in 15 PHCs of districts Ambala and Yamu-
 nanagar in the state of Haryana of India between
 February 2014 and 31 October 2015. Despite being
 economically well off with per capita income of nearly
 $2000, the health indices of Haryana do not match its
 economic prowess. 13 The crude birth rate (21.3/1000),
 maternal mortality ratio (146/100 000 live births) and
 under-5 mortality rate (51/1000 live births) are high and
 comparable to those of India (online supplementary
 table S1). 14–16 However, the state has good road connec-
 tivity and the district hospital (DH) can be reached
 approximately in an hour from the PHCs. The PHCs
 provide round-the-clock basic obstetric care and are typi-
 cally staffed by medical officers (MO; n=1–2; one of them
 being female MO as some patients prefer to be delivered
 by women) and nurses (n=3–4). There is no provision
 for blood transfusion, operative delivery, manual removal
 of placenta or care of small or sick neonates. The State
 provides free ambulance service to transport women or
 newborn infants needing referral care.
 We selected 15 of 30 PHCs of the two districts based
 on the number of deliveries being more than median
 annual number of deliveries (99 or more in a year) in the
 PHCs. The study was undertaken with active involvement
 of functionaries of National Health Mission (NHM), state
 government and DH.
 
<section> Design and intervention
 We employed SW cluster-randomised design to test our
 hypothesis. SW design offers pragmatic advantage of
 staggered rolling out of intervention, avoids dilemma
 of having a control group, is statistically more powerful
 and better controls for the secular trend than a before-
 and-after study. 17 18 The 21-month duration of the study
 was divided into seven periods (steps) of 3 months each
 (online supplementary figure S1). During the first
 months (period 1), none of the PHCs initiated interven-
 tion. From period 2 to period 5, a set of randomly selected
 three PHCs (which constituted a cluster for the study) initi-
 ated intervention in each period such that three PHCs
 were receiving intervention in period 2, six in period 3,
 nine in period 4, twelve in period 5 and all 15 PHCs in
 periods 6 and 7. An independent epidemiologist gener-
 ated the random allocation sequence without any strati-
 fication before start of the study, and kept it concealed
 from the study implementation team until the time of
 rolling out of the intervention in a PHC cluster.
 The intervention consisted of activities designed
 to (1) build clinical care capacity of health providers
 through self-directed and facilitated exercises, (2)
 assess structure, processes and outcomes of the PHCs
 to identify quality gaps, and (3) provider teams under-
 taking improvement activities to close the identified
 quality gaps. These activities were carried out in form
 of (1) internal quality management activities in weekly 
<insert> Figure 1 Conceptual diagram depicting activities during the intervention period. *Skills included those related to care women
 (general physical examination, obstetric examination, use of photograph and active management of third stage of labour), baby
 (measuring weight and axillary temperature, breast feeding support and detection of sickness) or both (hand hygiene). DH,
 district hospital; NHM, National Health Mission; OSCE, Objective Structured Clinical Examination; PHC, primary health centre;
 SoP, standard operating procedure. 
<iend>

 meetings (WM) and monthly meetings (MM), and (2)
 external quality management (EQM) activities in form
 of quarterly meetings (QM). Figure 1 provides details of
 activities undertaken in WMs, MMs and QMs. In brief,
 in WMs, the provider team assembled for approximately
 1 hour and discussed a topic from standard operating
 procedures (SoP), practised a skill, screened a video on
 their smartphone, audited a case managed in their PHCs,
 reviewed PHC records and selected dashboard indica-
 tors. The study team specially prepared simple SoPs and
 collected available simple and brief videos pertaining to
 care during and after childbirth and referral care (online
 supplementary table S2). This resource material, based
 on prevailing WHO and Government of India guidelines, 
<section> was supplied to the PHC teams. Every fourth WM (desig-
 nated as MM) was facilitated by one to two quality coaches
 (a nurse and/or a general-duty physician) from the study
 team. Initially, it was planned that NHM staff would
 play the role of quality coach; however, due to limited
 capacity, the study team had to replace NHM for this job.
 The provider teams prepared a report of WMs and MMs
 and shared it with study team for feedback.
 The EQM activities were carried out in place of every
 12th WM (designated as QM). In these QMs, a study
 team visited the PHC typically for 4 hours. This team of
 at least two external experts, NHM and DH officials and
 the respective quality coach(es) (a total of four to five
 members) visited the PHCs. The external experts were
 drawn from the faculty of paediatrics, obstetrics and
 nursing from surrounding medical and nursing colleges.
 Sometimes, a management science expert also partici-
 pated in the QMs. This team carried out structured assess-
 ment of the availability of physical and human resources,
 adequacy of supplies and functionality of equipment, key
 skills of the nurses and adequacy of case records. The
 team also performed a case audit and assessed client satis-
 faction by interviewing a couple of families present in the
 facility or managed in the past. The team witnessed QoC
 of clinical care actually being provided at the time of visit
 if there was an opportunity (eg, during childbirth) and
 also took stock of activities carried out in WMs and MMs
 (online supplementary table S2 provides tools used for
 the assessments). The team carried out assessment in a
 non-judgemental and cordial manner, encouraging the
 provider teams to share their achievements and frustra-
 tions and by appreciating their positive aspects. The team
 prepared a report on the strengths and weaknesses of the
 PHC and, together with the provider team, identified
 quality gaps and discussed ways to close the gaps in an
 ensuing debriefing meeting. The report was shared with
 NHM and DH administration for feedback and action.
 The provider teams undertook improvement activi-
 ties to close the quality gaps identified during different
 meetings. The NHM and/or DH officials participating
 in QMs were requested to assist in closing the gaps
 related to human and physical resources. The PHC staff
 learnt SoP, practised skills and discussed cases to close
 skill-related gaps. Records-related gaps were closed by
 education and encouragement. Additionally, as need-
 driven activities, study team designed structured case
 sheet containing partograph, discharge and referral
 cards, and postnatal monitoring chart for mother and
 baby for the PHCs. Client experience-related gaps were
 addressed by improving cleanliness and hygiene in the
 premises, improving communication skills of PHC staff
 and providing warm food to the admitted women.
 
<section> Outcomes
 
<section> The primary outcomes included number of women
 approaching PHCs for childbirth and 12 essential prac-
 tices around the time of childbirth (total 13 primary
 outcomes; online supplementary table S3). We also
 measured several secondary outcomes related to the
 clients’ experience of care and maternal and neonatal
 mortality and stillbirths (health outcomes).
 We employed a robust system of outcome assessment.
 An independent outcome assessment team collected
 outcome data by deploying one research nurse per
 PHC who directly observed care provided around the
 time of childbirth. The outcome team did not share the
 outcome data with the study intervention implementing
 team, PHC staff or health administrators. The research
 nurse was not involved in clinical care. The research
 nurse tracked (telephonically or through home visits) all
 women presenting to PHCs for childbirth, irrespective of
 place of delivery and their babies, and recorded if they
 were alive or not on the 7th and 28th and 42nd days after
 delivery. For outcomes related to the directly observed
 12 essential practices, women presenting to the PHC for
 childbirth were eligible for inclusion if the study observer
 could reach the PHC before delivery of the fetus.
 We carried out verbal autopsy (VA) of all stillbirths,
 neonatal or maternal death. A team of paediatricians,
 nurses and social scientists reviewed the VA data and
 identified steps of referral, cause and place of death
 and if death could have been prevented. The death was
 classified as preventable if, in opinion of the VA team,
 optimum treatment could have prevented it.
 Additionally, the study intervention team collected data
 on the gaps identified and gaps closed. A gap was defined
 as closed if it ceased to occur on any of subsequent QMs.
 
<section> Sample size calculation
 We used the method described by Hussey and Hughes for
 sample size calculation. 18 A systematic review of primary
 care research that estimated intracluster correlation coef-
 ficient (ICC) for 1039 variables from 31 studies found a
 median ICC of 0.005 with IQR of 0–0.021. 19 To account
 for potentially large clustering effect in different practices
 in the set of three PHCs, we assumed a relatively larger
 value of ICC (0.1). Based on the existing records, we esti-
 mated that the prevalence of the key practices ranged
 from 10% (eg, skin-to-skin contact after delivery) to 75%
 (use of uterotonic agents for augmentation of labour, a
 harmful practice) at the study PHCs (online supplemen-
 tary table S3). We hypothesised that with the interven-
 tion, the practices would improve by absolute percentage
 points of 10–15 in the intervention period. Assuming an
 ICC of 0.1, we needed to observe 30 deliveries per cluster
 of three PHCs per period of 3 months to achieve a power
 of 80%, and two-sided alpha value of 0.05.
 
<section> Ethics and consent
 The institutional ethics committees of WHO-Geneva,
 All India Institute of Medical Sciences-New Delhi and
 Government Medical College-Chandigarh approved the
 study protocol. Written informed consent was sought
 from women who were observed for collection of infor-
 mation about the 12 essential practices and a standard-
 ised consent form was used for this process highlighting 
<insert> Table 1 Quality gaps identified during quarterly quality management meetings and their closure rates
 Nature of quality gap
 Gaps identified
 n
 Gaps closed
 n (% of gap identified)
 Physical resources
  Infrastructure
 41 (25.5)
 23 (24.2)
  Functional equipment 7 (26.9)
  Supplies and consumables 11 (27.5)
 Provision of care 42 (35.9)
  Clinical care 21 (33.3)
   Routine intrapartum and postnatal care of mother 7 (24.1)
   Routine postnatal care of baby 14 (41.2)
  Referral care 21 (38.9)
   Detection and management of complications in mother 7 (31.8)
   Detection and management of complications in baby 4 (44.4)
   Timely referral and prereferral stabilisation 8 (50)
   Communication and feedback from referring unit 1 (16.7)
   Provider accompanying the family 1 (100)
 Actionable information system 35 (39.3)
 Skills of health providers 28 (38.9)
 Experience of care 4 (20.0)
 Human resources 1 (9.1)
 Others (disbursement of JSY money, utilisation of JSSK funds, etc)
 Total
 6 (66.7)
 157 (32.8)
 Values expressed as n or n (%).
 JSSK, Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram (Government of India’s programme to provide free treatment, food and transport facility to
 mother and her infant in public facilities in India); JSY, Janani Suraksha Yojana (conditional cash transfer scheme of Government of India). 
<iend>

 benefits, harms, role of participants, voluntary nature of
 participation and independence to withdraw. The infor-
 mation provided did not differ in the intervention and
 control arms and women did not know the ‘arm’ she was
 being recruited to. The study protocol was registered at ​
 CTRI.​org (CTRI/2016/05/006963).
 
<section> Statistical analysis
 The data were captured in electronic case record form
 with in-built options of range check and cross-validation.
 The Global Positioning System capability of the hand-
 held devices allowed us to track those data that were
 being recorded on the site and in real time. The outcome
 team monitored quality of data on an ongoing basis by
 cross-checking 10% data from PHC records and inde-
 pendently interviewing women. Data supervisor checked
 data for completeness and accuracy.
 Data were expressed as proportions, mean and SDs, or
 median and IQR. The outcome of number of deliveries
 was expressed in terms of PHC-month. Generalised esti-
 mating equations—population-averaged model was used
 to adjust the effect size of primary outcomes with random
 effect for cluster (PHC) and fixed effect for the ‘calendar
 time’. To account for the possible lag in uptake of inter-
 vention, we assumed the first intervention period to be
 the ‘lag-period’ and observations during this lag period
 were considered under ‘control period’. The analysis was
 two sided and by intention to treat. We did not make any
 correction for multiple comparisons. Data were analysed
 using Stata V.11.0 (StataCorp, USA).
 Additionally, for three case studies presented in the
 Results section, we calculated a composite care score for
 each mother–baby dyad by scoring observed practices
 (1=done correctly; 0=not done correctly) and expressed
 it as proportion, with the numerator being addition of
 scores of all observed practices for a mother–baby dyad
 and denominator being best possible score.
 
<section> Results
 
<section> Of the scheduled activities during the intervention
 period, 62% of WMs, 79% of MMs and 73% of QMs were
 conducted (online supplementary table S4). The PHC
 nurses participated more often than PHC MOs in the
 quality management activities (online supplementary
 table S4). At least two external experts, NHM and DH
 officials participated in QMs on 100%, 43.2% and 9.1%
 occasions, respectively.
 Of a large number of quality gaps (n=479) identi-
 fied during QMs, only 32.8% were closed successfully
 (table 1). Gaps related to human and physical resources
 and experience of care were less likely to be closed than 
<section> Figure 2 Study participant flow. *The women or the baby may
 those related to actionable information system, providers’
 skills and provision of care. In order to facilitate gap
 closure, the project team met NHM and district health
 administration (online supplementary table S5). Of the
 20 action items identified during these meetings, five
 were successfully accomplished and another five could
 partially be accomplished. The items related to provision
 of uniform records could be undertaken successfully.
 However, the action points related to ensuring adequate
 strength of nurses and sanitation staff, round-the-clock
 availability of electricity and provision of extra budget
 could not be undertaken.
 
<section> Study outcomes
 Patient flow and their baseline characteristics
 Of 7345 women approaching PHCs during the study
 period, 5108 delivered in the PHCs and 2237 were
 referred to higher centres before childbirth (figure 2,
 online supplementary figure S2). The research nurse
 observed care during and after childbirth of 1623 women
 and their babies during intervention period (median:
 per PHC cluster per 3 months period, IQR: 75.5–130.5)
 and 1720 women and their babies during control period
 (median: 79.5 per cluster period, IQR: 72.8–96.5). The
 women were relatively young, with low level of education,
 poor and more from vulnerable social groups. There was
 not a large difference in women admitted to the PHCs
 in two periods except that a lower proportion of them
 have required referral after delivery. PHC, primary health centre.
 
<section> belonged to underprivileged social classes in the inter-
 vention period (online supplementary table S6).
 
<section> Primary outcomes
 Table 2 shows the study primary outcomes. There was
 a 22% increase in number of women approaching for
 childbirth to PHCs during intervention period.
 Three of five key practices observed before childbirth
 improved in the intervention periods: hand hygiene
 before per-vaginal examination, recording of fetal
 heart rate and use of partograph. The practice of use of
 sterile gloves during per-vaginal examination remained
 unchanged while use of uterotonics for augmentation
 of labour (a harmful practice) was worsened. Among
 after childbirth practices, two of them, namely uterotonic
 use and early birth weight measurement, were almost
 universal in both the periods. Of the remaining five prac-
 tices, skin-to-skin contact with the mother immediately
 after birth, discharge after 24 hours of birth and adequate
 discharge preparedness improved in the intervention
 period. Two practices remained unchanged: drying the
 baby immediately after birth and early initiation of breast
 feeding.
 
<section> Secondary outcomes
 Figure 2 shows the participant flow. Of 102 stillbirths,
 (43.1%) occurred before women arriving to the PHC.
 There was no difference in rates of maternal or neonatal 
<insert> Women approached PHC for childbirth; n per
 PHC-month
 Practices before childbirth
 Intervention
 (n=1623)
 3514/135
 (26 per PHC-month)
  Hand hygiene before per-vaginal examination 695/1058
 on all occasions (65.7)
  Use of sterile gloves for per-vaginal
 examination on all occasions
 923/1263
 (73.1)
  Fetal heart rate recording on all occasions 1125/1263
 (89.1)
  Use of partograph on all obstetric
 examinations*
 535/1263
 (42.4)
  Augmentation of labour using uterotonic* 160/1411
 (11.3)
  Use of uterotonic after delivery for active
 management of third stage of labour
 1432/1448
 (98.9)
  Placing the baby in skin-to-skin contact with
 mother within 1 hour of birth
 886/1431
 (61.9)
  Initiation of breast feeding within 1 hour of
 birth
 946/1331
 (71.1)
  Baby dried within 1 min of birth 647/1448
 (44.7)
  Birth weight recorded within 2 hours of birth 1384/1405
 (98.5)
  Discharge after 24 hours after delivery 1103/1318
 (83.7)
 927/1165
 (79.6%)
 Practices after childbirth
  Adequate discharge preparedness†
 Data expressed as n (%) unless specified otherwise.
 PHC, primary health centre.
 *The summary statistics is expressed as adjusted ORs for all practices
 in terms of incidence rate ratio (IRR). The data were adjusted for secular
 having lower rates in intervention period than control period, adjusted
 †Presence of all: exclusive breast feeding at discharge, women counselled
 Table 2 Primary outcomes of the study 
<iend>

 mortality or stillbirths between two periods (online
 supplementary table S7).
 Of 171 deaths investigated by VA, 18 (10.5%) happened
 during referral transport and 94 (55.0%) at referral facili-
 ties. Forty per cent (35/87) of neonatal deaths and 21.5%
 (14/65) of fresh stillbirths experienced at least two steps
 of referral. Birth asphyxia was the most common (n=99,
 58.6%) cause of stillbirth and neonatal death followed by
 infection (n=18) and prematurity (n=18). Two maternal
 deaths and most of stillbirths or neonatal deaths (83.4%,
 141/169) were deemed preventable through provision of
 good-quality antenatal, intrapartum and referral care.
 
<section> Challenges
 
<section> We noted several challenges to improvement efforts
 during the study. Decrease in state NHM budget (from
 US$0.85 million in 2014–2015 to US$0.55 million in
 
<section> Adjusted OR/
 period Control period IRR*
 (n=1720) (95% CI) P values
 
<section> 3831/180 
<section> 1.22†
 (21 per PHC-month) (1.17 to 1.28)
 
<section> 660/1269 
<section> 1.47 
<section> 0.004
 
<section> (52.0) 
<section> (1.13 to 1.90)
 
<section> 1100/1340 
<section> 0.91 
<section> 0.52
 
<section> (82.1) 
<section> (0.67 to 1.22)
 
<section> 1070/1340 
<section> 1.47 
<section> 0.03
 
<section> (79.8) 
<section> (1.03 to 2.09)
 
<section> 675/1340 
<section> 1.63 
<section> <0.0001
 
<section> (50.4) 
<section> (1.28 to 2.07)
 
<section> 207/1567 
<section> 1.77 
<section> 0.003
 
<section> (13.2) 
<section> (1.21 to 2.58)
 
<section> 1426/1481 
<section> 1.27 
<section> 0.58
 
<section> (96.3) 
<section> (0.54 to 3.0)
 
<section> 670/1476 
<section> 1.38 
<section> <0.0001
 
<section> (45.4) 
<section> (1.18 to 1.62)
 
<section> 756/1390 
<section> 1.02 
<section> 0.86
 
<section> (54.4) 
<section> (0.82 to 1.26)
 
<section> 400/1478 
<section> 1.27 
<section> 0.06
 
<section> (27.1) 
<section> (0.99 to 1.63)
 1412/1439 1.49 (0.64 to 3.49) 0.35
 
<section> (98.1)
 825/1353 2.14 (1.60 to 2.88) <0.0001
 
<section> (61.0)
 
<section> 582/1249 
<section> 1.79 
<section> <0.0001
 
<section> (46.6%) 
<section> (1.41 to 2.27)
 
<section> except ‘women approached PHC for childbirth’ which was expressed
 trend and cluster. As a result, for the practices 4 and 5, despite
 ORs are in the opposite direction.
 and she is aware of danger signs for herself and her baby).
 
<section> 2015–2016) led to substantial reduction in the strength
 of its supervisory staff (from 22 to 2) and decline in its
 participation in the intervention activities (from 17/21,
 81.0% of QMs in the first half to 3/30, 10% in the
 second half of study). The frequent changes in leader-
 ship at state level (two changes in state health secretary,
 one change in director, Mother and Child Health), in
 NHM (two changes in mission director) and at DH (two
 changes in chief MO in one) in second half of the study
 led to fragility of the health system. The transfer out of
 nurses to other health facilities influenced the optimum
 functioning of PHCs (case study, vide infra). Most PHC
 nurses were contract job worker (51/60; 85%) getting
 approximately 40% of the monthly salary as compared
 with nurse in the regular job (US$; 140 vs 400). PHC
 MOs had multiple job responsibilities within and outside 
<section> PHCs (mandatory jail duty, night duties at community
 health centre (CHC), additional responsibilities at DH,
 multiple trainings within and outside PHC) limiting their
 focus on childbirth services at their own PHC. Nine of
 15 PHCs did not have female MO for a period of at least
 3 months during the study period. None of the PHCs
 had deployment of sanitary or security staff and the PHC
 staff had to make adhoc arrangement for these services.
 The other significant challenges included prolonged
 and regular power outages (up to 16–18 hours for most
 PHCs) with inadequate/non-existent power backup, no
 provision for fresh and warm food for mothers, delay in
 availability of ambulances, suboptimal system of supply
 of essential drugs resulting in local purchases and lack of
 uniformity of records.
 
<section> Case studies
 
<section> Most of the PHCs showed improvement in key practices
 related to childbirth during the study. However, contex-
 tual factors such as local leadership, adequate availability
 of human resources and incidental activities influenced
 the effect of intervention. We illustrate three case studies
 highlighting such influences (Box 1 and figure 3). In the
 first case study, a poorly performing PHC showed signif-
 icant improvement due to strong leadership of the MO
 in charge. In the second case study, QoC declined due to
 transfer out of three of the five nurses from a high case
 load PHC. In the third case study, an already well-per-
 forming PHC deteriorated following a maternal death.
 
<section> Discussion
 
<section> The intervention strategy in our study has shown a modest
 effectiveness: increase in number of deliveries signifying
 improved utilisation of PHC and modest improvement of
 6–12 key practices. There was no suggestion of any change
 either in stillbirth or neonatal mortality rates (secondary
 outcomes). Importantly, the study highlights two very
 important issues with serious implication to future
 research and policy: (1) despite substantial strengthening
 of the public health system in past two decades, there
 exists a significant degree of fragility and weakness at all
 levels potentially undermining any improvement efforts;
 (2) a majority of stillbirths and neonatal deaths occurred
 in women and their babies during referral transport or at
 the referral facilities.
 Five randomised controlled studies have investigated
 impact of interventions to improve QoC at the time of
 childbirth at PHCs. 20–25 Taking cues from the evidence
 of efficacy of use of the surgical checklist in settings of
 strong health systems, the BetterBirth study focused on
 providers using a checklist tool to improve essential prac-
 tices during childbirth and reduce mortality in settings
 of weak health systems (Uttar Pradesh, India). The study
 intervention was limited to providing intense coaching
 (43 visits in 8 months) to the facility staff for use of the
 checklist for improving the uptake of life-saving practices
 and did not specifically focus on strengthening of the
 
<section> Box Case studies
 
<section> Case study
 
<section> PHC A, located 12 km away from the district headquarter, had
 deployment of one to five nurses and two MOs during the study
 period. This PHC was one of the poorly performing PHCs and it
 initiated intervention in the fourth month of the study. Motivated by the
 quality management process, the MO in charge provided exceptional
 leadership to the team resulting in significant improvement in the
 PHC performance over the remaining study period (figure 3). The
 number of deliveries increased from an average of 6 per month in the
 control period to 17 per month in the intervention period. There was
 a significant improvement in composite care score. The MO in charge
 took keen interest in the quality management activities by supervising
 the work of nurses, closing gaps in the staff deployment by interacting
 with district hospital administration. The PHC added an extra labour
 table, constructed a toilet in labour room and put up curtains in
 postnatal ward to ensure privacy.
 
<section> Case study
 
<section> PHC B, located in a township, had two MOs including one female
 MO, two to five nurses and adequate physical infrastructure. The
 PHC initiated intervention in the 15th month of the study. It had a
 high case load (average 36 deliveries per month) during the study
 period. The composite care score of the PHC was high indicating
 good performance of the PHC during initial 12 months. At 12 months,
 there were major changes in the deployment of health providers in
 the PHC: reduced strength of nurses (from five to two) due to transfer
 of three nurses and the additional responsibility given to the MO at
 the DH making him unavailable for good part of his time for the PHC.
 As a result, there was a significant decline in composite care score
 in ensuing months (figure 3). The two nurses were unable to deliver
 optimum childbirth services due to excessive workload and the
 MO was not able to provide leadership to the PHC team. There was
 inadequate uptake of quality management activities when intervention
 started at the PHC from the 15th month of the study.
 
<section> Case study
 
<section> PHC C, located about 11 km away from the district headquarter,
 had one to two MOs including a female MO and two to five nurses
 during the study period. The PHC had labour room and postnatal care
 facilities as per the state norms. This PHC initiated intervention in the
 fourth month of the study. The MO in charge was a motivated and
 committed person and led the team to provide good services with a
 large number of deliveries (n=15 per month) occurring in the PHC.
 During the 11th month of study, a maternal death occurred, which led
 to an enquiry by the district administration. The MO got intimidated
 and proceeded on leave. Thereafter, she was irregular and distracted
 from her work. The staff got demoralised and the community behaved
 in a hostile manner. The number of deliveries declined. Quality
 management team made persistent efforts to raise the morale of the
 staff and continued to visit the PHC and interact with staff. The MO
 resumed work only after about 4 months and there was improvement
 in services thereafter.
 
<section> DH, district hospital; MO, medical officer; PHC, primary health centre.
 
<section> health system or provider skills. While the study did find
 a modest improvement in the practices (73% in interven-
 tion arm vs 42% in the control arm) with use of checklist
 at 4 months of intervention, there was no effect on the
 perinatal death, maternal deaths and maternal severe
 complications. Also, the improvement in practices too 
<insert> Figure 3 Performance of three primary health centres (PHC). Y-axis represents the care score derived from adding the
 number of 12 childbirth practices received by a patient. Dots represent the care score of individual observed patient. Solid line
 with shaded area represents the smoothed trend in care score and its 95% CI. 
<iend>

 dwindled in a few months of cessation of the interven-
 tion. Unfortunately, this study did not provide concrete
 data as to why the intervention was modestly effective in
 improving practices and did not improve mortality and
 other health outcomes. A study with factorial design from
 Malawi showed no reduction in neonatal and perinatal
 mortality with improvement intervention at facility
 level unless it was combined with community mobilisa-
 tion. 20 There was 22% reduction in neonatal mortality
 with combined facility and community intervention and
 16% reduction in perinatal mortality with community
 intervention alone. Another cluster-randomised trial in 
<section> PHCs of India reported improved provider prepared-
 ness, facility readiness to deal with childbirth and related
 complications, and improved practices as reviewed from
 records.
 Our study focused on a multipronged approach
 targeted at improvement of all the important pillars
 of the health systems and systematically measured the
 existing gaps in health systems and barriers to quality
 improvement. The facility staff drove the improve-
 ment process with external mentoring and with the
 involvement of government functionaries. Though our
 study results are in agreement with BetterBirth study, it
 provides deeper insight as to why improvement efforts
 in these two important studies may not have yielded the
 expected results and what could be the way forward to
 improve the QoC and health outcomes in small facilities.
 Our study reinforces the WHO notion, which is based
 on Donabedian model, that provision of optimum QoC
 requires existence of a robust health system including
 leadership/governance, accountability, adequate
 financing, skilled and committed human resource and
 physical resources. 6 12 The improvement processes in our
 study identified a large number of serious gaps (n=479) in
 almost every essential domain of the health system. More-
 over, low level of motivation and a lower level of account-
 ability, and vulnerability of the health systems to a variety
 of contextual factors further hindered the improvement
 process. Many of identified gaps (n=322/479, 67.2%)
 could not be closed despite multiple improvement activ-
 ities, undertaken by the facility staff and efforts made by
 the project team as these required concrete actions at
 the higher level of health system, which was also seriously
 limited. The effective closure of gaps in skills requires a
 high level of motivation for learning of the providers as
 well as availability of enough opportunities for honing
 of the skills. For effective functioning of the PHCs, we
 feel multiple factors have to be addressed that include
 but not limited to health systems made more resilient by
 ensuring stability of the leadership, easy fund flow, the
 issue of availability of skilled and motivated providers
 and creating a framework of accountability at all levels.
 There is a need to explore if the available resources can
 be used in a more efficient manner—likely strengthening
 of better performing PHCs and downscaling low-volume
 PHCs. While the governments and policymakers are
 understandably looking for the scalable models of
 improving QoC that work in the health system with all
 its weaknesses, our study strongly highlights the need to
 have stronger, accountable and responsive health system
 as an essential prerequisite for significant improvement
 in QoC at health facilities. In our study, implementation
 of the intervention package was led by PHC healthcare
 workers with periodic external facilitation. More intensive
 support or mentoring by EQM teams could have made
 more impact on the study outcomes. However, sustain-
 ability of improvement achieved by such an approach
 has not been demonstrated. 11 Large number of gaps in
 healthcare infrastructure identified in the study indicates
 the intervention package should have stronger quality
 assurance component.
 PHCs cater to low-risk conditions. Linking these institu-
 tions to referral facilities through optimal referral trans-
 port is critical to improve health outcomes of its clients.
 But, this critical link is often not as effective as it should be.
 There are delayed recognitions of conditions requiring
 referral and suboptimal transport (second delay) and
 significant third delay in overburdened referral facilities.
 VA data revealed that 49 of 152 stillbirths or neonatal
 deaths, families had to visit at least two referral facili-
 ties for the want of care. Nearly two-thirds (112/171) of
 deaths occurred in patients during referral transport or
 at referral facilities. A large number of stillbirths occurred
 even before women presenting to the PHC highlighting a
 poor quality of antenatal care including optimum coun-
 selling of women to recognise danger signs. In face of
 existence of such critical weakness in the health system,
 the bad outcomes cannot be effectively averted no matter
 how good QoC is provided at the smaller facilities. It is
 therefore imperative that the QoC programmes target
 improvement of services at all levels starting from first
 contact facilities to the referral centres.
 Our study has several limitations. It was a small study
 involving only 15 PHCs with relatively low case load in
 two districts and not powered for mortality and other
 important health outcomes. As the perinatal, neonatal
 and maternal mortality outcomes can only be influenced
 if a range of services (processes) are improved, we took
 13 outcomes to be studied as the primary outcomes. We
 calculated the sample size for each of these 13 practices
 and took the largest sample size. However, the analysis
 does not account for multiple hypotheses testing. The
 primary outcome of number of deliveries depended on
 several other factors apart from QoC but we believe that
 study design addressed this issue. The study investigators
 could not have blinded. However, we employed robust
 independent outcome measurement. We did not evaluate
 costing and the sustainability of the model. Lastly, the SW
 design does not fully compensate for secular trend but is
 a design of choice for such interventions. The effect of
 contextual factors on the success of QM approach was
 demonstrated by three different case studies. However,
 this before-and-after analysis does not preclude the
 potential effect of secular trend.
 In conclusion, our study reports modest effectiveness
 of a quality management strategy driven by the provider
 teams with external facilitation in small health facilities
 of Haryana, India. We noted several serious and difficult-
 to-close quality gaps in the health system as the limiting
 factors for desirable level of improvement in QoC and
 potentially health outcomes. Two-thirds of deaths
 occurred in women and their babies during the trans-
 port or at the referral facilities. We recommend that a
 stronger and functional health system and a responsive
 and accountable mechanism to identify and effectively
 close the quality gaps in health system must be an inte-
 gral part of any QoC programmes. 
<section> Author affiliations
 Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical
 
<section> Sciences, New Delhi, India
 Department of Neonatology, Government Medical College Hospital, Chandigarh,
 
<section> India
 Survival for Women and Children Foundation (SWACH), Panchkula, India
 Saha Manthran Pvt Ltd, Gurugram, India
 National Health Mission (Haryana), Government of India, Panchkula, India
 Maulana Azad Medical College and LNJP Hospital, New Delhi, India
 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Government Medical College Hospital,
 
<section> Chandigarh, India
 National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India
 
<section> Pt BD Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak, India
 
<section> PGIMER, Chandigarh, India
 MM College of Nursing, Mullana, Ambala, India
 Department of Biostatistics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
 
<section> India
 Safadarjung Hospital and Vardhman Mahavir Medical College, New Delhi, India
 Government Medical College, Kannauj, India
 Swami Dayanand Hospital, New Delhi, India
 Western Command Hospital, Panchkula, India
 Santosh Medical College, Gaziabad, India
 
<section> UNICEF Rajasthan, Jaipur, India
 
<section> UNICEF Chhattisgarh, Raipur, India
 Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi, India
 
<section> WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
 
<section> Collaborators We are grateful to the study coinvestigators, and the
 implementation and management teams, including: Mamta Jajoo, MD; Vinay
 Kulkarni, Neeraj Gupta, DM; Anju Huria, MS; Levis Murry, Prahlad Agarwal,
 Herbaksh Kaur, Amit Duggal, Jaidev Khatri, Vinod Gupta, Mangat Ram Passi, VP
 Mann, Alaknanda Malik, Bela Jain, VK Jain, Deepshikha Sharma.
 
<section> Contributors Writing committee: RA, DC, VK, VKP, RB. Investigators: NHM,
 Haryana: RG, SK, SKD, KJ, AS, SS, AD (NHM), JK; SWACH, Chandigarh: VK, PM,
 MS; AIIMS, New Delhi: VKP, RA, SC, MJS, AT, VS, CPY; GMCH, Chandigarh: DC, ST,
 SJ; Saha Manthran, Gurugram, Haryana: SN, PA; Maulana Azad Medical College,
 New Delhi: KA; PGIMER, Chandigarh: PK; PGIMS, Rohtak: GG, KB; MM College of
 
<section> Nursing, Mullana, Ambala: JS, YK; WHO, Geneva: RB. Protocol development: VKP, VK,
 RB, DC, MJS. Study implementation: VK, PM, MS, Gagandeep, DS. Study resources
 development: SC, VKP, VK, AT, KA, RA, DC, MJS, RB. Study data team: DC. Study
 external facilitation team: RA, VPM, SC, SN, Shikha Taneja, KA, AT, GG, PK, JS, SJ,
 KCA, Yogesh Dhankar, PK, SSB, GS, RA, PD, RS, RY, KB, RB. Data analysis: MJS, RB,
 DC, VK, RA, VKP, CPY, VS.
 
<section> Funding The study was funded through a grant to the WHO by USAID. The WHO
 team participated in the protocol development, and provided technical support
 to the investigators in implementation, analysis of data, interpretation of findings
 and preparation of the manuscript. The corresponding authors had full access to
 all the data in the study and bear the final responsibility for deciding about the
 publication.
 
<section> Disclaimer RB is a staff member of the World Health Organization. The expressed
 views and opinions in this paper do not necessarily express the policies of the World
 Health Organization.
 
<section> Competing interests None declared.
 
<section> Patient consent Obtained.
 
<section> Ethics approval The institutional ethics committees of the World Health
 Organization, All India Institute of Medical Sciences and the Government Medical
 College, Chandigarh.
 
<section> Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
 
<section> Data statement The deidentified dataset is available upon request.
 
<section> Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with
 the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license,
 which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work
 non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms,
 provided the original work is properly cited, appropriate credit is given,
 any changes made indicated, and the use is non-commercial. See: http://​
 creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by-​nc/​4.​0/
 
<section> References
 1. Liu L, Oza S, Hogan D, et al. Global, regional, and national causes
 of under-5 mortality in 2000-15: an updated systematic analysis
 with implications for the Sustainable Development Goals. Lancet
 2016;388:3027–35.
 2. GBD 2015 Maternal Mortality Collaborators. Global, regional, and
 national levels of maternal mortality, 1990-2015: a systematic
 analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet
 2016;388:1775–812.
 3. GBD 2015 Child Mortality Collaborators. Global, regional, national,
 and selected subnational levels of stillbirths, neonatal, infant, and
 under-5 mortality, 1980-2015: a systematic analysis for the Global
 Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 2016;388:1725–74.
 4. Baqui AH, Mitra DK, Begum N, et al. Neonatal mortality within
 hours of birth in six low- and lower-middle-income countries. Bull
 World Health Organ 2016;94:752–8.
 5. Lawn JE, Blencowe H, Waiswa P, et al. Stillbirths: rates, risk factors,
 and acceleration towards 2030. Lancet 2016;387:587–603.
 6. Tunçalp Ӧ, Were WM, MacLennan C, et al. Quality of care
 for pregnant women and newborns-the WHO vision. BJOG
 2015;122:1045–9.
 7. 2017. National Family Health Survey. http://​rchiips.​org/​NFHS/​
 factsheet_​NFHS-​4.​shtml (accessed 8 May 2017).
 8. Powell-Jackson T, Mazumdar S, Mills A. Financial incentives in
 health: New evidence from India's Janani Suraksha Yojana. J Health
 Econ 2015;43:154–69.
 9. Chaturvedi S, De Costa A, Raven J. Does the Janani Suraksha
 Yojana cash transfer programme to promote facility births in India
 ensure skilled birth attendance? A qualitative study of intrapartum
 care in Madhya Pradesh. Glob Health Action 2015;8:27427.
 10. Bhutta ZA, Salam RA, Lassi ZS, et al. Approaches to improve Quality
 of Care (QoC) for women and newborns: conclusions, evidence
 gaps and research priorities. Reprod Health 2014;11(Suppl 2):S5.
 11. Semrau KEA, Hirschhorn LR, Marx Delaney M, et al. Outcomes of a
 coaching-based WHO safe childbirth checklist program in India. N
 Engl J Med 2017;377:2313–24.
 12. Donabedian A. The quality of care. How can it be assessed? JAMA
 1988;260:1743–8.
 13. 2017. Per Capita National Income. http://​pib.​nic.​in/​newsite/​
 PrintRelease.​aspx?​relid=​123563 (accessed 12 Feb 2017).
 14. 2017. Census of India : Sample Registration System. http://www.​
 censusindia.​gov.​in/​2011-​Common/​Sample_​Registration_​System.​
 html (accessed 12 Feb 2017).
 15. Open Government Datadp.awasthi, 2017. Trends in Under Five
 Mortality Rates - India and Bigger States. (OGD) Platform India.
 2013. Available from: https://​data.​gov.​in/​catalog/​trends-​under-​five-​
 mortality-​rates-​india-​and-​bigger-​states [accessed 12 Feb 2017].
 16. Sonkusare A, 2017. Below Poverty Line in India. Open Government
 Data (OGD) Platform India. 2014. https://​data.​gov.​in/​catalog/​below-​
 poverty-​line-​india (accessed 12 Feb 2017).
 17. Hemming K, Haines TP, Chilton PJ, et al. The stepped wedge cluster
 randomised trial: rationale, design, analysis, and reporting. BMJ
 2015;350:h391.
 18. Hussey MA, Hughes JP. Design and analysis of stepped wedge
 cluster randomized trials. Contemp Clin Trials 2007;28:182–91.
 19. Adams G, Gulliford MC, Ukoumunne OC, et al. Patterns of intra-
 cluster correlation from primary care research to inform study design
 and analysis. J Clin Epidemiol 2004;57:785–94.
 20. Colbourn T, Nambiar B, Bondo A, et al. Effects of quality
 improvement in health facilities and community mobilization through
 women's groups on maternal, neonatal and perinatal mortality
 in three districts of Malawi: MaiKhanda, a cluster randomized
 controlled effectiveness trial. Int Health 2013;5:180–95.
 21. Brown H, Hofmeyr GJ, Nikodem VC, et al. Promoting childbirth
 companions in South Africa: a randomised pilot study. BMC Med
 2007;5:7.
 22. Jayanna K, Bradley J, Mony P, et al. Effectiveness of onsite nurse
 mentoring in improving quality of institutional births in the primary
 health centres of high priority districts of karnataka, south india: A
 cluster randomized trial. PLoS One 2016;11:e0161957.
 23. Namazzi G, Waiswa P, Nakakeeto M, et al. Strengthening health
 facilities for maternal and newborn care: experiences from rural
 eastern Uganda. Glob Health Action 2015;8:24271.
 24. Jennings L, Yebadokpo A, Affo J, et al. Use of job aids to improve
 facility-based postnatal counseling and care in rural Benin. Matern
 Child Health J 2015;19:557–65.
 25. Jennings L, Yebadokpo AS, Affo J, et al. Antenatal counseling in
 maternal and newborn care: use of job aids to improve health worker
 performance and maternal understanding in Benin. BMC Pregnancy
 Childbirth 2010;10:75.