
<section> © 2021 The Author(s)
 
<section> JoGH © 2021 ISoGH
 
<section> Partnering faith
 health workers
 antenatal care
 in Ethiopia: A
 
<section> Brandon L Guthrie ,
 Adino T Tsegaye ,
 Katherine C Rankin ,
 Judd L Walson ,
 Getahun A Alemie
 
<section> 1 Departments of Global Health
 and Epidemiology, University
 of Washington, Seattle, WAUSA
 2 Department of Epidemiology
 & Biostatistics, University of
 Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia
 3 Department of Global Health,
 University of Washington,
 Seattle, Washington, USA
 4 Departments of Global Health,
 Medicine, Pediatrics, and
 Epidemiology, University
 of Washington, Seattle,
 
<section> Washington, USA
 5 College of Medicine and Health
 Sciences, University of Gondar,
 
<section> Gondar, Ethiopia
 
<section> Correspondence to:
 
<section> Dr. Brandon L Guthrie
 Departments of Global Health and
 
<section> Epidemiology
 
<section> UW Box 351620
 University of Washington
 
<section> Seattle, WA, 98195
 
<section> USA
 brguth@u.washington.edu
 
<section> Cite as: Guthrie BL, Tsegaye AT, Rankin K, Walson JL, Alemie GA. Partnering faith
 leaders with community health workers increases utilization of antenatal care and facility
 delivery services in Ethiopia: A cluster randomized trial. J Glob Health 2021;11:04063.
 
<section> leaders with community
 increases utilization of
 and facility delivery services
 cluster randomized trial
 
<section> Background Ethiopia and other countries continue to experience high rates of mater-
 nal mortality and neonatal deaths. Interventions are needed to increase utilization of
 antenatal care (ANC) and facility delivery services to improve outcomes.
 
<section> Methods A cluster-randomized trial was conducted in the Amhara Region of Ethiopia,
 with 6 communities randomly assigned to receive the intervention and 12 communi-
 ties monitored as controls. Intervention teams provided outreach to pregnant women
 and their families. Registry data were used to measure utilization of services provided
 at health centers in intervention and control communities.The intervention consisted
 of trained pairs of community health workers and Ethiopian Orthodox priests who
 worked together to promote health messages around safe delivery. The pairs visited
 pregnant women and their families in their homes to provide counseling, discuss con-
 cerns, and answer questions about ANC and facility deliveries. Intervention impact
 was measured using facility-level data on monthly number of ANC visits and facility
 deliveries at the health centers that served the intervention and control communities.
 Intervention effect was measured using difference-in-difference analyses estimated by
 generalized estimating equation models.
 
<section> Results During the 12-month intervention period, intervention facilities (n = 6) record-
 ed 14% more ANC1 visits (relative risk RR = 1.14; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.09-
 
<section> 1.19; P < 0.001) and 26% more ANC4 visits (RR = 1.26; 95%CI = 1.18, 1.34; P < 0.001)
 compared to control health centers (n = 12). The intervention health centers experi-
 enced a 10% increase in facility deliveries over what would have been expected had
 the intervention not occurred (RR = 1.10; 95% CI = 1.05-1.16; P < 0.001).
 
<section> Conclusions Promotion of safe delivery through home visits by community health
 workers paired with Ethiopian Orthodox priests increased utilization of ANC and fa-
 cility delivery services. This approach could leverage the influential role of faith leaders
 and increase the impact of community health workers in Ethiopia.
 
<section> Trial registration NCT04039932.
 Ethiopia has made great strides in reducing maternal and child mortality in the last decade.
 Despite these gains, maternal mortality in Ethiopia remains high, with women experienc-
 ing a 1 in 55 lifetime risk of maternal mortality (a maternal mortality ratio of 401/100
 live births) [1-3]. Neonatal mortality also remains high, increasing from 29 to 30 deaths
 per 1000 live births between 2016 and 2019, although overall child mortality declined
 (from 67 to 55 deaths per 1000 live births) [4]. Access to care varies widely between ur-
 ban populations and Ethiopia’s rural populations, which constitute the majority of the
 country’s citizens. 
<section> Several interventions have been demonstrated to reduce maternal and neonatal deaths. These include atten-
 dance at antenatal care visits (4 recommended) and delivery in a facility with skilled health care providers. In
 the Amhara region of Ethiopia, many women do not utilize these services. For example, 17% of women in the
 Amhara region do not receive any antenatal care and only 51% receive all four recommended visits. In addi-
 tion, just over half of women (51%) give birth in a health facility with health care providers equipped to pro-
 vide a safe delivery and manage complications [4].
 
<section> There are many factors that contribute to low maternal service utilization in Ethiopia, including geographic,
 economic, cultural, and health system barriers. Ethiopia has rapidly scaled its health system over the past two
 decades, but still faces shortages of health care workers. The health extension program has been a successful
 strategy in shifting some primary health care activities to cadres of community health workers, but still faces
 challenges in covering large catchment areas and disseminating health education. As of 2017, there were only
 0.84 nurses and midwives per 1000 people [5], the cadre of health care workers that staff the primary health
 care system. Given the strained health system and existing strengths of the Health Extension Program, there
 is a need for improved community engagement strategies that leverage existing community networks, partic-
 ularly in rural areas, to mobilize the community to improve maternal and child health.
 Community mobilization strategies often work to identify community leaders or influencers to promote health
 education and perform outreach. In particular, faith leaders are frequently identified as community members
 with the potential to influence societal norms and promote or hinder health behaviors [6]. Prior studies have
 shown that engagement of faith leaders, particularly for vaccination, malaria, and HIV health campaigns, can
 improve the engagement of communities in health education and practice [7]. Less is known, however, about
 models of faith leader engagement for increasing service utilization among women around childbirth, a criti-
 cal window for preventing maternal and child deaths.
 
<section> The Amhara region of Ethiopia provides a unique setting to test a model for faith leader engagement, with 84%
 of the population adhering to the Ethiopian Orthodox Christian (EOC) faith. The EOC maintains a high degree
 of influence on cultural and behavioral practices with their followers in most communities in this region. We
 conducted a community randomized trial to test the hypothesis that deploying faith leaders with communi-
 ty health workers in outreach and education activities for maternal health would improve attendance at ANC
 visits and increase uptake of facility delivery.
 
<section> METHODS
 
<section> Study setting
 
<section> The Faith Leaders Advocating for Maternal Empowerment (FLAME) study was a community-based interven-
 tion to increase the number of women who utilize antenatal care (ANC) and facility delivery services in the
 Gondar areas of Ethiopia. The effect of the intervention was assessed based on outcomes extracted from regis-
 try data at health centers that serve study communities. Health centers are the lowest level primary health care
 facilities in the Ethiopian health system where comprehensive maternal and child health services are provid-
 ed, including standard ANC and skilled delivery. The study was conducted in the North, West, and Central
 Gondar Zones of the Amhara Region of Ethiopia. Pregnant women and their families in the selected areas are
 likely to belong to the Ethiopian Orthodox religion, work as farmers, and be of low socio-economic status.
 Our sample for this intervention included health centers serving rural or peri-urban populations with similar
 ANC and facility delivery volumes. A total of 18 health centers were randomly selected from 30 eligible health
 centers in the study area, out of the 126 health centers in the 22 districts constituting the three zones (Figure
 
<section> 1). Determination of health center eligibility was based on a systematic assessment of all health centers in the
 study area. For each selected facility, the catchment area was defined as the population served by the health
 center. Health centers served as the unit of randomization for the trial and sites were randomized at a ratio of
 2 control communities per 1 intervention community.
 
<section> Randomization
 
<section> The health centers selected for the trial were enrolled between August and December 2017. Randomization was
 conducted by a biostatistical consultant who was not involved in the study after all study sites were enrolled
 in the trial. Randomization was conducted using a random number generator to assign a random number to
 each study health center, with the 6 smallest numbers assigned to the intervention group and the largest
 numbers assigned to the control group. No concealment of allocation was conducted. ATT and GAA enrolled
 health centers and assigned health centers to study arm based on the randomization list. 
<insert> Figure 1. CONSORT diagram of community cluster enrollment, randomization,
 follow-up and analysis. 
<iend>

 Priests of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church and
 ties and received training on maternal health
 community outreach and counseling prior
 ployed into their communities to conduct outreach
 of worship, and in other community forums
 Priests and HDA members provided referrals
 and provided counseling to overcome barriers
 
<section> During the first 6 months of the intervention,
 tation teams to monitor intervention activities.
 of the study to 1 meeting every two months.
 reimbursement for their travel and time to attend
 team members traveled to the intervention communities
 the faith leaders and members of the HDA. During
 number of pregnant women identified and referred
 es were delivered, problems encountered, and
 
<section> Study outcomes and data collection
 
<section> The primary outcomes measured for this study
 fourth ANC visits (ANC4) and the number of
 facilities. These outcomes were measured as
 lected every other month by trained data collectors
 at each of the participating health centers. Data
 of Gondar. Twelve months of data were collected
 of the intervention, which served as a baseline
 control and intervention health centers.
 
<section> Utilization of antenatal care and facility delivery services in Ethiopia
 
<section> Eligibility criteria
 
<section> Health centers were eligible for inclusion in the
 study if they were accessible for data collection,
 defined as being within 4 hours of Gondar city by
 car and no more than one-hour walking distance
 from the road (during the rainy season, some fa-
 cilities require a walk of up to 4 hours). Eligible
 health centers had a minimum monthly average of
 50 live births, based on their registry reporting to
 the Federal Ministry of Health. They were required
 to maintain a maternal child health registry consis-
 tent with Federal Ministry of Health standards and
 had to have adequate capacity to deliver ANC and
 delivery care, as defined by the Federal Ministry of
 Health. Eligible health centers also had to serve a
 catchment population of whom at least 75% iden-
 tified as Orthodox Christian. Health centers were
 ineligible if they had >200 deliveries per month or
 if they were located within an area with ongoing
 civil unrest and security threats at the time of site
 selection.
 
<section> Trial registration: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
 NCT04039932.
 
<section> Intervention
 
<section> Intervention communities received a one-year
 package of outreach and education activities com-
 pleted by trained faith leaders partnered with com-
 munity health workers from the Health Develop-
 ment Army (HDA) of the Ethiopian health system.
 members of the HDA were recruited from selected communi-
 topics (with emphasis on ANC and facility delivery services) and
 to the intervention. Pairs of faith leaders and HDA members de-
 to pregnant women and their families at home, in houses
 on topics of maternal health including ANC and facility delivery.
 to care for pregnant women they encountered in the community
 to care for families.
 
<section> the study team held monthly check-in meetings with implemen-
 Meetings decreased in frequency during the second 6 months
 Faith leaders and HDA members received a small transportation
 the study check-in meetings (approximately 15 USD). Study
 for check-in meetings and led group discussions with
 these meetings, outreach teams reported activities including
 for ANC and facility delivery, events where health messag-
 potential solutions identified.
 
<section> were the number of first ANC visits (ANC1), the number of
 births attended by skilled health personnel at the selected health
 monthly counts at each of the study health centers. Data were col-
 who abstracted information from the registries maintained
 collection was monitored by a data manager at the University
 from health center registries for the period prior to the start
 measure of the outcomes to be used for comparison between 
<section> Statistical analysis
 
<section> Characteristics of study health centers and their catchment populations were compared between control and
 intervention health centers based on medians and interquartile ranges. Differences between groups were as-
 sessed based on Poisson regression with robust standard errors. The effects of the intervention on the outcomes
 of interest were estimated based on a difference-in-difference approach that used the baseline values for control
 and intervention health centers to estimate the counterfactual levels of the outcome during the intervention
 period among intervention communities had the intervention not occurred [8]. A difference-in-difference ap-
 proach was used for this analysis to account for any differences between control and intervention health cen-
 ters during the baseline period and to account for potential temporal trends resulting in different mean levels
 of the outcome between baseline and intervention periods. These quantities were estimated using generalized
 estimating equations (GEE) with a Poisson family and a log link, which allowed for the correlation between
 outcomes measured at the same health centers across time. Effect estimates were expressed as relative risks
 (RR); a multiplicative effect size estimate was selected because of variation in baseline counts of the outcome of
 interest, and it was hypothesized a priori that the intervention would have an effect that was proportional to the
 baseline level of the outcomes rather than an additive effect. The models contained a term for the study group
 (ie, control or intervention), the study period (ie, baseline or intervention period), and an interaction term be-
 tween the study group and the study period. This model produced an estimate of the mean monthly count of
 the outcomes across the 12-month baseline and intervention periods, allowing for different means between
 study groups and study periods, and the difference between study groups was allowed to vary independent-
 ly between baseline and intervention periods. The difference-in-difference effect estimate was determined by
 the interaction term in the model. All analyses were conducted in Stata version 14 (Stata Corp, College Sta-
 tion, TX, USA). The analysis plan was defined a priori and was registered in clinicaltrials.gov (NCT04039932).
 
<section> Power and sample size
 
<section> The intervention trial included 6 intervention facilities and 12 controls facilities. The trial was designed to have
 80% power to detect an 8% increase in the total number of facility deliveries between control and intervention
 facilities during the trial period, based on a Poisson distribution with α = 0.05 and accounting for clustering
 by facility assuming a coefficient of variation κ = 0.25, consistent with published values from other studies of
 
<section> MNCH outcomes [9].
 
<section> Ethical approval
 
<section> Ethical approval was granted by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of Gondar. The study
 received a waiver of consent for the interactions between the intervention teams and the pregnant women and
 their families. This waiver was requested because it would not have been feasible to obtain individual consent,
 and the waiver was granted because the research was judged to be no more than minimal risk, all interactions
 with pregnant women and their families was voluntary, and no information about individual participants was
 collected. All outcomes were aggregated at the facility level and thus no identifiable information was accessed
 or recorded.
 
<section> Patient and public involvement
 
<section> Healthcare workers and members of the public participated in focus group discussions that informed the de-
 sign of the intervention and implementation of the trial. Representatives of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church
 were involved in planning of the trial and in identification and training of priests who participated in the tri-
 al. Results were disseminated to the Ethiopian Ministry of Health and to representatives of the Ethiopian Or-
 thodox Church.
 
<section> RESULTS
 
<section> We selected 18 health facilities that each serve distinct catchment areas that were eligible for the study inter-
 vention. Of these, 6 were randomly assigned to the intervention arm and 12 were assigned to the control arm.
 The estimated median catchment population was somewhat larger for control facilities (33 158; interquartile
 range (IQR) = 26 081 to 36 174) compared to intervention facilities (32 756; IQR = 30 020 to 35 378) (Table
 
<section> 1). Facility characteristics were similar between control and intervention sites, although control facilities had
 modestly higher median staffing levels for clinical officers (2 vs 1), nurses (8 vs 6), and midwifes (3 vs 2), while
 a somewhat smaller median number of members of the HDA were linked to control facilities as compared to
 intervention facilities (10 vs 11.5). 
<insert> Communities (Kebeles) served
 Catchment population
 Delivery beds
 Clinical officers
 Nurses
 Midwives
 Pharmacists
 Laboratory technicians
 Health extension workers
 Health Development Army workers
 Control facilities (n = 12);
 median (IQR)
 Intervention facilities (n = 6);
 median (IQR) P-value
 5.5 (4, 7)
 33 158 (26,081, 36 174)
 2 (2, 2.5)
 2 (1, 2.5)
 8 (6, 8.5)
 3 (3, 4)
 1 (1, 2)
 1 (0, 2)
 10 (8.5, 13.5)
 184 (146, 214)
 6.5 (5, 8)
 32 756 (30,020, 35 378)
 2 (2, 3)
 1 (0, 1)
 6 (6, 7)
 2 (2, 3)
 1 (1, 2)
 1 (1, 1)
 11.5 (11, 14)
 240 (194, 365)
 0.25
 0.45
 0.52
 0.13
 0.61
 0.01
 0.39
 0.99
 0.21
 0.21
 *Characterists of intervention and control facilities were compared using Poisson regression models with robust standard errors. Statisti-
 cally significant differences at the level of α = 0.05 are indicated in bold.
 Table 1. Characteristics of facilities that served control and intervention communities* 
<iend>

 Utilization of antenatal care and facility delivery services in Ethiopia
 
<section> During the 12-month pre-intervention baseline period (8 June 2017 to 7 June 2018), there were no differences
 between control and intervention facilities in the primary outcome measures. During the baseline period, the
 mean number of monthly ANC1 visits was 50.1 among control facilities and 50.8 visits among intervention
 facilities (RR = 1.02; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.92-1.12; P = 0.76). The mean monthly number of ANC4
 visits was 24.4 among control facilities and 24.6 visits among intervention facilities (RR = 1.01; 95% CI = 0.88-
 
<section> 1.16; P = 0.91). Control facilities had a mean of 35.2 facility deliveries per month compared to 32.8 deliveries
 per month at the intervention facilities (RR = 0.93; 95% CI = 0.82, 1.07; P = 0.31). Facility-specific patterns of
 ANC1, ANC4, and facility deliveries during the baseline and intervention periods are shown in Figures S1-S3
 in the 
<section> Online Supplementary Document.
 
<section> First ANC visits
 
<section> During the 12-month intervention period (8 June 2018 to 7 June 2019), the mean number of ANC1 visits
 per month decreased significantly to 44.0 among control facilities (n = 12) (P < 0.001) (Figure 2, Panel A),
 while in the intervention facilities (n = 6), the mean number of monthly ANC1 visits was 50.9, remaining un-
 changed from the baseline period (P = 0.97). Accounting for the pre-intervention baseline levels, the estimated
 difference-in-difference intervention effect was an increase of 14% in ANC1 visits compared to the estimat-
 ed counterfactual condition had these communities not received the intervention (RR = 1.14; 95% CI = 1.09-
 
<section> 1.19; P < 0.001).
 
<section> Fourth ANC visits
 
<section> At control facilities (n = 12) during the intervention period, monthly ANC4 visits decreased to a mean of 20.0
 visits compared to the pre-intervention period (P < 0.001) (Figure 2, Panel B). In contrast, at intervention fa-
 cilities (n = 6), mean monthly ANC4 visits increased non-significantly to 25.3 (P = 0.24). This shows an inter-
 vention effect of a 26% difference-in-difference increase in the number of fourth ANC visits in the intervention
 communities (RR = 1.26; 95% CI = 1.18, 1.34; P < 0.001).
 
<section> Facility deliveries
 
<section> During the intervention period, compared to the pre-intervention period, the mean number of monthly facil-
 ity deliveries decreased in control facilities (n = 12) to 26.9 per month (P < 0.001) and in intervention facilities
 (n = 6) decreased to 27.7 per month (P < 0.001) (Figure 2, Panel B). While facility deliveries decreased in inter-
 vention facilities, because the decrease was significantly less than in the control facilities, the difference-in-dif-
 ference intervention effect on facility deliveries was an increase of 10% in monthly facility deliveries above
 what would have been expected had the intervention not occurred (RR = 1.10; 95% CI = 1.05-1.16; P < 0.001).
 
<section> Service disruptions, outliers, and sensitivity analyses
 
<section> We observed a number of outlier occurrences during the baseline and intervention period due to short-term
 events that affected utilization of ANC and delivery services at some health facilities. Throughout the interven-
 tion period, particularly in the second half of the period, there were intervals of insecurity and political unrest
 that affected many of the study communities, both control and intervention. During these intervals of insecu- 
<insert> Figure 2. Effect of the faith leader / community health worker partnership intervention on antenatal care engagement and
 facility deliveries. Panel A. Time series of monthly outcomes measured at study health centers comparing intervention and
 control sites show both between and within facility variation in outcomes over time. Thin black lines indicate intervention
 facilities and thin grey lines indicate control facilities. The thick black line represents the mean number of outcomes for
 intervention facilities and the thick grey dashed line represents the mean for control facilities. The medium black line in-
 dicates the mean that would have been expected in intervention facilities had the intervention not occurred. The vertical
 line indicates the timing of the intervention implementation. Panel B. Difference-in-difference effect of the intervention. 
<iend>

 rity, characterized by civil unrest due to political instability in the country, movement within the affected com-
 munities was unsafe, leading to lower service utilization at the affected facilities. These intervals of insecurity
 were intermittent and affected different areas at different times and to differing degrees. While logs were kept
 by the study team to note changes in security conditions across sites, it was not possible to collect detailed,
 systematic information about the exact locations and timing of these intervals of insecurity, and therefore it is
 not possible to accurately account for their effect in the analysis. However, we know that because of insecu-
 rity, control facility #10 was closed for months 7-9 of the intervention period. There was a subsequent spike
 in ANC1 and ANC4 visits at this facility in month 10 of the intervention period as women who were unable
 to attend in the previous months came in for missed ANC visits. In sensitivity analyses that excluded facility
 #10, the intervention effect on ANC1 decreased slightly (RR = 1.12; 95% CI = 1.08-1.17; P < 0.001), the effect
 on ANC4 increased slightly (RR = 1.32; 95% CI = 1.25-1.39; P < 0.001), and the effect on facility deliveries de-
 creased slightly (RR = 1.08; 95% CI = 1.02-1.13; P = 0.004).
 
<section> Facility 3, an intervention facility, experienced a period of sharply elevated number of monthly ANC4 visits
 (35-61 vs 21-30 per month) and facility deliveries (70-96 vs 26-40 per month) starting in month 8 of the base-
 line period and extending to month 2 of the intervention period for facility deliveries and month 6 for ANC4
 visits. After this period, both ANC4 and facility deliveries returned to levels more consistent with the baseline
 period. Upon investigation, this elevation in service utilization was attributed to a robust health education cam-
 paign conducted by the health facility during this period. In sensitivity analyses that excluded facility 3, the
 intervention effect on ANC4 visits decreased slightly (RR = 1.23; 95% CI = 1.15-1.31; P < 0.001) and the effect
 on facility deliveries increased slightly (RR = 1.13; 95%CI = 1.07, 1.19; P < 0.001).
 
<section> DISCUSSION
 
<section> This community cluster-randomized trial showed that utilization of ANC services and facility deliveries were
 significantly increased by an intervention that paired faith leaders with community health workers to conduct Utilization of antenatal care and facility delivery services in Ethiopia
 
<section> community outreach and education. The faith leaders were Ethiopian Orthodox priests and the communi-
 ty health workers were members of the Health Development Army. The intervention increased ANC1 visits
 by 14%, ANC4 visits by 26%, and facility deliveries by 10% compared to what would have been expected
 had the intervention not occurred, which was estimated based on the pre-intervention baseline period and
 the experience of control facilities during the baseline and intervention periods. The intervention had the
 greatest impact on increasing the number of ANC4 visits, which we believe is consistent with a mechanism
 of action involving increased recognition of the importance of completing the full course of recommended
 ANC visits, leading to greater motivation to participate in ANC. Attendance at a first ANC visit is relative-
 ly common in this area, estimated at 83% of pregnancies, although women in rural areas have lower ANC
 utilization [10]. This provided a limited opportunity for the intervention to increase ANC1 participation.
 However, many of these women do not complete the recommended 4 ANC visits (51%) [10]. Therefore, we
 believe that this intervention was particularly effective in encouraging women to complete all of their ANC
 visits. Additional qualitative research would provide insight into which elements of the intervention were
 most motivating for women and their families. While the intervention did not increase facility deliveries
 relative to the baseline period, the difference-in-difference analysis indicates that the intervention had the
 effect of preventing the magnitude of decline in facility deliveries observed at control health centers during
 the intervention period, which were possibly due to the effects of local insecurity. The intervention’s lower
 magnitude of effect on facility deliveries may reflect larger structural barriers to facility delivery that cannot
 be readily overcome through motivational counseling and education, highlighting opportunities to identi-
 fy specific barriers that may be addressable through additions to the intervention package, such as strate-
 gies to overcome transportation barriers or childcare concerns. These results are likely most generalizable
 to Ethiopian Orthodox communities throughout Ethiopia, but other faith communities that have leaders
 who serve important influential roles in the community, most notably Muslim communities, would likely
 benefit from a similar intervention. We believe that the intervention may be generalizable to other settings,
 but would likely depend on the presence of engaged community leaders who are willing and able to part-
 ner with community health workers.
 
<section> Most evaluations of the scope and effectiveness of faith-based organizations in relation to health have focused
 on faith-based health providers (FBHP) that provide direct medical and health services, with much less atten-
 tion given to the role of faith leaders as influential members of the community who can work in collaboration
 with health care workers [11], but it is clear that there is an important interface with cultural and faith tradi-
 tions when it comes to an individual’s health decisions [12] and there are examples of successful partnerships
 between faith-based organizations and health systems [13]. Despite concerns about quality of services deliv-
 ered by FBHP, empirical measurements of patients’ perceptions of care provided in these settings are general-
 ly positive [14], although concerns have been raised about the effect of theology on provision of sexual and
 reproductive health care [15]. In the model evaluated in the current study, we show that faith-leaders can
 work effectively with health centers and community health workers, including in the context of pregnancy
 and delivery. Our experience is consistent with other findings that partnerships are productive when there is a
 shared collaborative domain that is not the “sovereign space” of either partner and that these partnerships do
 not require that the “parties buying into every possible implication of the collaboration” [16]. Our interven-
 tion using faith leader/community health worker pairs compares well against other interventions to increase
 ANC utilization and facility deliveries. A systematic review found some evidence that mHealth interventions
 may increase attendance at 4 ANC visits by around 10%, compared to 26% in the current study [17]. A sys-
 tematic review and meta-analysis found evidence of a modest effect of a single community-based intervention
 (media campaigns, education, or financial incentives for pregnant women) to improve attendance of at least
 1 ANC visit (pooled OR = 1.68; 95% CI = 1.02- 2.79), attendance of at least 4 ANC visits (pooled OR = 1.11;
 95% CI = 1.01-1.22), and facility deliveries (pooled OR = 1.08; 95% CI = 1.02-1.15) [note that ORs will be
 larger than equivalent RRs because these outcomes are not rare]. Experience from other successful models of
 partnerships between faith communitees and the health system have identified important guiding principles
 for longterm success and sustainability that include the assessment of the asset base, focusing on community
 scale implementation, building trust with the community, leading with humility, following community-based
 participatory research principles, taking a person-centric rather than hospital-centric perspective, using an in-
 tegrative strategy that blends traditional clinical or biomedical care with community caregiving, and using a
 shared-data protocol that includes indicators of value to all stakeholders [6]. Additional research will be need-
 ed to evaluate the broader implementation, fidelity, sustainability, and cost of the intervention that takes these
 guidelines into consideration.
 
<section> The intermittent episodes of insecurity that occurred during the intervention period had a considerable impact
 on the ability of people living in the study communities to travel, which reduced access to the study facilities 
<section> and reduced utilization of ANC and delivery services. We observed significant decreases in ANC1, ANC4,
 and facility deliveries at the control facilities during the intervention period compared to the baseline period,
 and we believe the insecurity issues were at least partly responsible for this decreased utilization. By contrast,
 ANC1 and ANC4 visits remained essentially unchanged at intervention facilities during the intervention peri-
 od while facility deliveries declined, but to a lesser degree than at control facilities. This background effect on
 the outcomes during the intervention period complicates the interpretation of the intervention’s effectiveness.
 We outline 3 scenarios that could explain the observed results. (Scenario 1) The intervention was effective, and
 was of a magnitude that offset the decline in ANC visits that would have happened, and it softened the effect
 that insecurity had on facility deliveries. Under this scenario, in the absence of the insecurity, the intervention
 would have had an equivalent effect, resulting in an increase in all outcomes. (Scenario 2) The intervention
 was effective, but its effect was only in lessening the impact of the insecurity, and in the absence of the insecu-
 rity, the intervention would not have been effective. (Scenario 3) The intervention was not effective, and the
 apparent effectiveness was due only to the fact that control communities, due to random chance, happened
 to have been affected more severely by the insecurity than intervention communities. We believe that the fact
 that facility deliveries declined at intervention facilities during the baseline period while ANC visits held steady
 indicates that Scenario 3 is unlikely due to the belief that in the presence of intermittent insecurity, women
 who were motivated through the intervention to access ANC would have been able to time their ANC visits to
 coincide with periods of relative safety. By contrast, facility deliveries would be more affected because of the
 inflexibility of timing. We are unable to determine whether Scenario 1 or 2 is more likely, but this illustrates
 the benefit of the inclusion of both a baseline period and of control facilities. The difference-in-difference ap-
 proach enabled us to estimate the intervention effect relative to the expected counterfactual outcome had the
 intervention not occurred.
 
<section> Limitations
 
<section> This study benefited from a study design that provided a degree of robustness to the unexpected insecuri-
 ty issues that affected the intervention period and could have obscured the intervention effect in an uncon-
 trolled pre-post study design. However, in addition to the potential that the insecurity affected control and
 intervention communities disproportionately, as described above, a number other factors limit the interpre-
 tation of our results. There were a relatively small number of communities included in this study, and only
 6 communities were assigned to the intervention. While this sample size provided sufficient power to detect
 the intervention effect, the small number communities increased the chance that confounding factors were
 not equally distributed between groups. The comparability of facility characteristics between groups and the
 lack of difference in the number of primary outcomes during the pre-intervention baseline period provides
 some evidence in support of the success of randomization. The difference-in-difference design was used to
 account for pre-intervention difference between control and intervention facilities. Outcomes were measured
 at the facility-level rather than at the level of individuals who were exposed or unexposed to the interven-
 tion; therefore the effect estimates should be considered a community-level measure of effectiveness rath-
 er than an individual-level measure of efficacy among those who actually received the intervention. Finally,
 since we relied on facility registries for outcome measurements, it is possible that there was some measure-
 ment error in counting outcomes. Any such measurement error is likely to be non-differential in relation to
 randomization group, and thus the average effect of mismeasurement would be an underestimate of the true
 intervention effect.
 
<section> CONCLUSIONS
 
<section> This trial demonstrated the feasibility and effectiveness of partnering faith leaders with community health work-
 ers at a community level to improve engagement in antenatal care services and facility deliveries attended by
 skilled providers. Effective training and supervision of these teams is likely to be critically important to scaling
 and maintaining such an intervention, but this approach holds great potential to improve maternal and child
 health. We believe that this strategy for community engagement is adaptable to other faith communities and
 to other types of trusted and influential community leaders in a variety of regions and countries. Further study
 of the applicability of this model is needed. 
<section> Acknowlegments: We extend special thanks to all
 en and their families, faith leaders, health extension
 like to gratefully thank Strengthening Care Opportunities
 nizations who conducted the study including the
 SCOPE student fellows, University Presbyterian Church,
 opia MCH Directorate, the Gondar Regional Health
 with this study. Ethical approval was granted by
 study received a waiver of consent for the interactions
 families. This waiver was requested because it would
 was granted because the research was judged to be
 their families was voluntary, and no information
 
<section> Data sharing statement: Individual-level participant
 data that underlie the results reported in this article
 cal analysis plan, and analytic code will also be made
 5 years following article publication to researchers
 the approved proposal. Proposals should be directed
 will need to sign a data access agreement.
 
<section> Funding: This study was funded through a Partnerships
 (5-610). The funder approved the study protocol,
 
<section> Authorship contributions: BLG, KP, JLW, and GAA
 recruitment and collected specimens. BLG, ATT, JLW,
 uscript with support from ATT, KP, JLW, and GAA.
 ysis and manuscript, and approved the final version
 
<section> Competing interests: The authors completed the
 corresponding author), and declare no conflicts of
 
<section> Additional material
 Online Supplementary Document
 
<section> 1  Maternal Mortality - Levels and trends 2000 to 2017.
 
<section> 2  Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000
 
<section> REFERENCES
 
<section> indicator/SH.STA.MMRT?locations=ET. Accessed: 31
 
<section> 3  Lifetime risk of maternal death (1 in: rate varies by country)
 SH.MMR.RISK?locations=ET. Accessed: 31 May 2020.
 
<section> 4  Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 2019. Available:
 
<section> 5  Nurses and midwives (per 1,000 people) - Ethiopia,
 SH.MED.NUMW.P3?locations=ET-US&view=chart.
 
<section> 6  National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine.
 Health: Proceedings of a Workshop. Faith Health Collaboration
 DC: The National Academies Press; 2021.
 
<section> 7  Duff JF, Buckingham WW. Strengthening of partnerships
 2015;386:1786-94. Medline:26159394 doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60250-1
 
<section> 8  Dimick JB, Ryan AM. Methods for evaluating changes
 2014;312:2401-2. Medline:25490331 doi:10.1001/jama.2014.16153
 
<section> 9  Pagel C, Prost A, Lewycka S, Das S, Colbourn T, Mahapatra
 ation for perinatal outcomes from five cluster-randomised
 methodological implications. Trials. 2011;12:151. Medline:21672223
 
<section> 10  Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI) [Ethiopia]
 cators. Rockville, Maryland, USA; 2019. Available: www.DHSprogram.com.
 
<section> 11  Olivier J, Tsimpo C, Gemignani R, Shojo M, Coulombe
 providers in Africa: Review of the evidence with a focus
 75. Medline:26159398 doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60251-3
 
<section> 12  Germond P, Cochrane JR. Healthworlds: Conceptualizing
 doi:10.1177/0038038509357202
 
<section> 13  Cutts T, Gunderson G, Carter D, Childers M, Long
 Way: Lessons Learned from Emerging Health System
 line:28724682 doi:10.18043/ncm.78.4.267
 
<section> 14  Wodon Q, Olivier J, Tsimpo C, Nguyen MC. Market
 2014;12:8-20. doi:10.1080/15570274.2013.876739
 
<section> Utilization of antenatal care and facility delivery services in Ethiopia
 community members who participated in this study particularly wom-
 workers, and health development army members. The authors would
 through Partnership in Ethiopia (SCOPE) and its partner orga-
 North Gondar Diocese, the University of Gondar Steering Committee,
 and all members of the FLAME team staff. We thank the Ethi-
 Office, and the facility heads and in-charges for their collaboration
 the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of Gondar. The
 between the intervention teams and the pregnant women and their
 not have been feasible to obtain individual consent, and the waiver
 no more than minimal risk, all interactions with pregnant women and
 about individual participants was collected.
 data do not exist for this study. Monthly facility-level aggregated
 will be made available, after de-identification. Study protocol, statisti-
 available. Data will be made available starting 3 months and ending
 who provide a methodologically sound proposal to achieve aims in
 to mailto:brguth@u.washington.edu; to gain access, data requestors
 for Enhanced Engagement in Research (PEER) award from USAID
 but was not involved in the conduct, analysis, or manuscript preparation.
 conceived and planned the study. ATT and GAA conducted study
 and GAA planned and carried out the analyses. BLG wrote the man-
 All authors provided critical feedback, helped shape the research, anal-
 to be published.
 ICMJE Declaration of Interest Form (available upon request from the
 interest.
 
<section> Available: http://mmr2017.srhr.org/. Accessed: 31 May 2020.
 live births) - Ethiopia Data. Available: https://data.worldbank.org/
 May 2020.
 - Ethiopia Data. Available: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
 www.DHSprogram.com. Accessed: 1 June 2019.
 United States Data. Available: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
 
<section> Accessed: 1 June 2020.
 Faith Health Collaboration to Improve Community and Population
 to Improve Community and Population Health. Washington
 between the public sector and faith-based groups. Lancet.
 in health care policy: The difference-in-differences approach. JAMA.
 
<section> R, et al. Intracluster correlation coefficients and coefficients of vari-
 controlled trials in low and middle-income countries: Results and
 doi:10.1186/1745-6215-12-151
 and ICF. Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey 2019: Key Indi-
 
<section> Accessed: 2 June 2020.
 H, Dimmock F, et al. Understanding the roles of faith-based health-care
 on magnitude, reach, cost, and satisfaction. Lancet. 2015;386:1765-
 Landscapes of Health and Healing. Sociology. 2010;44:307-24.
 
<section> P, Marisiddaiah L, et al. From the Memphis Model to the North Carolina
 and Faith Community Partnerships. N C Med J. 2017;78:267-72. Med-
 share of faith-inspired health care providers in Africa. Rev Faith Int Aff. 
<section> 15  Smith A, Kaybryn J. HIV and Maternal Health: Faith Groups’
 
<section> 16  Gunderson G. Deeply woven roots: Improving the quality
 
<section> REFERENCES
 
<section> 17  Watterson JL, Walsh J, Madeka I. Using mHealth to Improve
 A Systematic Review of the Literature. BioMed Res Int.
 
<section> Activities, Contributions and Impact. 2013.
 of life in your community. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press; 1997.
 Usage of Antenatal Care, Postnatal Care, and Immunization:
 2015;2015:153402. Medline:26380263 doi:10.1155/2015/153402